---
layout: page
permalink: /chapter_1/
title: Chapter 1
---
<script src="https://hypothes.is/embed.js" async></script>

chapter summary
===

This dissertation looks at new ways of reading *queer bodies* and *queer
experience* within technological contexts. How do digital tools and
platforms change the way we interact with affect (associated with queer
experience and embodiment) within texts? What about the digital allows
us to activate *sensational* reading experiences? In other words, how
does digital media interface with queerness?

This chapter proposes a reading methodology that leverages the critic\'s
relationship to the text to open possibilities for interpretation and
connections to the textual material. It explores the ways that reading
practices across two different fields (digital humanities and queer
theory) intertwine, and how this creates a new method for reading queer
narratives in digital contexts.


Queerness, the Digital & Touch
------------------------------

If digital humanists and queer theorists are going to find some common
ground, they might start with *touch*. Touch is a means of interfacing
with the world, an encounter between subject and object, which signals a
problem of access that applies to both electronic media and queer
subjectivity. The root of the word digital, \"digitus,\" comes from the
Latin word for finger or toe, and in electronic media, it refers to a
counting system based on ten digits[^1]. Associations between the
digital and touch evolve from numerical computation to include the
haptic connections made through the intermediaries of mice, keyboards,
and touch screens. Crucially, these intermediaries of digital media
demonstrate that humans can only engage with data at a remove. Through
layers of abstraction and formalization, computational media can be
handled and manipulated. Moving to the context of queerness, touch
similarly points to a phenomenon of access. Like digital media, queer
subjectivity is a raw content that cannot be known or engaged with
directly, because queerness is not legible within the framework of
heteronormativity. The expectation of heteronormativity precludes access
to queer subjectivity. At the intersection of the digital and queerness,
then, the phenomenon of touch indexes this problem of access.

This examination assumes that both queerness and data are untouchable
except through the intermediary of abstraction. And it supposes that the
parallels between data and queer subjectivity might coalesce into a
reading method, which engages queer subject matter with digital media
through the matrix of touch. Touch offers a means of knowing based on
feeling that amplifies sensation beyond the readily sensible. A
complicated thesis about touch which this chapter will unpack: touch
operates by abstracting its object through the intermediary of the
sensible. This process of abstraction compensates for the core condition
of queerness, which is unknowable, and of digital media, which is a
formalization of the inexpressible. In transforming inaccessible data
into new form, *queer forms*, that run parallel and at times converge
with digital aesthetics, queerness can be sensualized and engaging.
Touch is an orientation around reading that works by abstracting the
senses to provide alternative possibilities and pathways for sensation.

Two examples will serve to demonstrate that queerness is concerned with
touch, and more precisely, with *the desire for touching* which is
continually frustrated. Both examples draw from a digital aesthetic,
which I will elaborate as *queer form*, though one is from a digital
source and the other from print. Although the physical format of these
sources matter, this is not my point. Rather, the relevant
characteristics of queer form center on a self-consicous and critical
stance about its own abstraction.

The first text, entitled *These Waves of Girls* by Caitlin Fisher,
figures touching as desire quite literally, with touch being the means
of pursuing desire. This \"hypertext,\" an electronic text format that
links \"nodes\" or pages within an associative structure, enacts desire
by tempting the reader to click through the various episodes of the
story in order to achieve narrative closure. *Waves* is an
autobiographical account of the author\'s sexual coming-of-age, which
unfolds in a series of interconnected vignettes that recount Fisher\'s
adolescent experiences with men and women. Despite winning the 2001
Electronic Literature Organization Award, this \"hypertext novella\"
draws much criticism for a formal structure complicates a
straightforward reading experience. Through the profusion of hyperlinks,
which connect one node to the next in ways that disrupt temporal and
causal relations, this hypertext frustrates the reader's desire for
narrative coherence. The relatively comfortable and conventional reading
practice of turning the pages in a traditional codex dissolves in the
distracting and technical complexity of a narrative that requires effort
to traverse. One critic argues that the use of hyperlinks "present\[s\]
a baffling range of choices for movement which actually led to a
stifling of movement altogether" (Pope, "Significance").

!["DARE", "I liked girls...", "the lover", "Only one of us
is 15...", "Jerk off..."](../qt_writings/one/videos/erotic.gif)

The disorienting feeling of reading this text is an effect of its queer
form. Episodes do not have a discernible chronology or progression, and
clicking on the links between nodes disrupts any sense of coherence.
While the desire for narrative closure is continually frustrated by the
work\'s form, in another sense, this fragmentary structure exactly
constitutes its appeal, for it compels the reader to chase an elusive
understanding of sexuality. The text continually defies the reader's
expectations about the narrator\'s motives. In one repeatedly linked
node, aptly titled "erotic," we see "and it was the most erotic year of
my life" march across the screen like ticker tape ("And it was...").
This node is accessed through two different sources, both featuring
sexual episodes between the narrator and men. In a novella that largely
consists of stories about the narrator's sexual history and fantasies
with other women, these nodes are unusual, checking the reader's
expectations about the narrator's identity and desire. The accumulation
of seemingly capricious sexual episodes disrupts the relationship
between cause and effect, scrambling the reader\'s sense of direction
across the text. Other moments in the text create a similar dissonance
from the associations the narrator\'s motives. One occurs in the last
node of the "beam routine" episode, when the narrator is about to
perform gymnastics to placate a man that she brought home. The link
reads "I don't want to have sex," and it leads the reader back to a
familiar episode about \"Jennie Winchester\":

    I'm in bed with Jennie Winchester and I realize she wants me to 
    undo her pants. She needs to be home by 11:00 and needs to leave 
    my place by 10:45. I'm kissing her but opening my eyes at intervals 
    to catch the clock. At exactly 10:43 I unbutton her Levis and shove 
    my hand inside, barely undoing the zipper. "I'm in bed..."

Now the reader experiences this familiar node in a new way that casts
its former meaning into doubt. Why is this episode linked from the
phrase, \"I don\'t want to have sex\"? Why is the narrator watching the
clock? What at first seems straightforward now appears to support
alternate readings because the character\'s desires have been muddled by
the unpredictable connections between episodes. The reader's confusion
in navigating through *Waves* reinforces queerness as something elusive,
a condition that is not fully intelligible.

The frustration of touch activates a sensorium of queer affects. For
queer subjects, touch and the desire for touching has always been a
frought experience. In my second example, *The Confessions of the Fox*
by Jordy Rosenberg, the main character exhibits a troubled relationship
to touch which in part constitutes his subjectivity. Set in eighteenth
century London, this story follows Jack Sheppard, a young transgender
male as a wily thief amid a group of \"rogues.\" Before the official
pathologization of nonnormative desires and identities, Sheppard
struggles to articulate his difference, what he calls his
\"*Something*,\" from the rest of London: \"This something that set him
apart from other coves \[men\]. Something that had caus\'d him to dress
his own chest in taut bandages... pinching at his ribs, throttling his
every Breath to a forced shallow bird-sipping of the air\" (33). The
hesitance toward self-identification extends from the main character to
the narrative\'s genre, which unfolds as historical fiction overlaid
with contemporary fictional memoir. Sheppard\'s story is discovered in
the present day by Dr. Voth, a rueful academic who is also transgender.
Voth immediately recognizes the historical significance of Sheppard\'s
manuscript, and he proceeds to annotate the document with relevant
references and increasingly, his own tangential anecdotes. In one scene
of the manuscript, Sheppard is having a romantic moment when Voth
relates his own episode about a former lover:

    She opened her legs a bit, twitched them open, really. I caught my
    breath, audibly.
    "Oh my god," she said, "you're such a lesbian."
    She didn\'t mean it cruelly. And she didn\'t mean that I wasn\'t
    passing as a cis-man, either. Although, since according to her we\'d
    fucked the night before, she knew exactly how un-cis I was.
    She meant that she saw something about the quality of my desire: that
    I could feel her even before I touched her. And that this was part of
    what it meant to be---or to have been, before my tits became property
    of the California Municipal Waste Department---a lesbian. That a woman
    moving in your line of sight could have an effect that was total,
    atmospheric. That you could be hesitant, incapable, and not
    particularly interested in establishing a line between touching and
    seeing. That you would indulge a dead love, dead in the eyes of the
    world, and valueless. A love that choked and burdened the mind, that
    might even be the very foundation of melancholy and despair. But, oh
    Reader, looking at a woman you really get a feel for the way that fire
    is a phenomenon of touch. And my point is, if you have every been a
    lesbian, you will not even have to touch a woman to know that. 169

Here, desire is characterised not by the search for satisfaction, or the
success of establishing contact, but by the sensual fullness of a lack.
The experience of desire, of craving, wanting, needing to touch the
desired object stimulates the imagination and amplifies sensations that
would otherwise be replaced with more \"direct\" modes of contact. The
lover\'s reference to Dr. Voth as \"such a lesbian\" brings this
distinction about physical and imaginary contact to the realm of
identity, reinforcing the interplay between imaginary and real when it
comes to touch. Though Dr. Voth is not a lesbian, the term fits because
it signals not a gender or sexual identity but a sensuality that is more
concerned with the potential of connection rather than verifiable
contact. The appellation hinges on the role of the imagination in
activating certain sensations--\"total,\" \"atmospheric\"---that
supercede those in the actualized world. Therefore, Dr. Voth\'s visual
fancy takes on connotations of the fanciful. But this does not mean the
sensations resulting from this desire are any less palpable. On the
contrary, such a desire maximizes physical experience: it is a desire
for something that, because it cannot or will not be fulfilled,
amplifies the fullness of that desire. This mode of desiring is what
characterizes queerness in the text. Here, touch, or the lack of touch,
defines a peculiarly queer subjectivity.

In both *Waves* and *Confessions*, queerness is constituted by a
troubled relationship to touch, reinforcing queerness as something that
cannot be grasped or is beyond grasp. In *Waves*, touch is the
continually frustrated means for traversing the narrative: clicking her
way though the nodes, the reader fails to grasp the arc of the story or
the intentions of the narrator. In *Confessions*, denying touch casts
queer identity as something beyond categorization. Maintaining the gap
between sight and touch stimulates the senses beyond what\'s possible
within normative expectations of sexual desire. This condition of
inaccessibility gestures at an affect of suspension or displacement that
is central to the experience of queerness, an affect that I call the
\"untouchable,\" which we now explore in depth.

The idea of the \"untouchable\" builds off queer theorists who have
isolated a queer experience of displacement, estrangement, or a feeling
of a lack that creates a space for emergent affects. This experience
derives from the political and social environment that attempts to erase
the existence of minorty subjects, particularly queer people of color.
Even as LGBT groups appear to gain more visibily and acceptance, such
gains are trapped within the limiting, normative time of the present. In
response to this, José Esteban Muñoz defines queerness as a desire, a
\"longing that propels us onward,\" for what is \"not yet here.\" Muñoz
explains:

    Queerness is *a structuring and educated mode of desiring* that allows
    us to see and feel beyond the quagmire of the present... Queerness is
    a longing that propels us onward, beyond romances of the negative and
    toiling in the present. Queerness is that thing that lets us feel that
    this world is not enough, that indeed something is missing. Emphasis
    mine, *Cruising Utopia* 1

The ontological nature of queerness is founded in a lack, in a vacuum.
Rather than strive that missing thing, or a forward-looking,
future-oriented desire, \"not yet here\" indicates an emanant quality
situated within the present. Because queerness is \"not yet here,\" it
calls for something else, for something that \"allows us to see and feel
beyond the quagmire of the present,\" opening a space for emergent
affects. In other words, queerness expands a sensibility of feeling to
include sensations beyond the immediate, the readily sensible.

Footnotes
=========

[^1]: Although digital computation runs on data in the form of these
    numerical digits, computer language, at the most rudimentary level,
    is based on a binary counting system, on ones and zeroes. (citation
    to Sadie Plant\'s *Zeroes and Ones*)
