---
layout: page
title: Prospectus
permalink: /prospectus/
---

### The Rise of Queer DH
Since the popularization of "distant reading," there has been much
debate about what digital tools and methods can do for the humanities,
and literary studies in particular.[fn:1] Although many DH
practitioners have been careful to situate their methodologies within
the context of humanistic study, there persists an idea that digital
methods ought to verify, correct, or establish facts about literature
and literary history, similarly to the qualitative social
sciences.[fn:2] However, within the broad field of "Digital
Humanities," an emerging /Queer/ DH is upending this assumption. This
recent work interrogates some of the ways that “queerness” might
address DH research practices, and tends to center around speculative
or critical making projects that emphasize the constructed nature of
technical objects and promote play. For example, Zach Blas and micha
cárdenas’s /transCoder/, a “queer programming anti-language,” features
programming functions inspired by Judith Butler like the
“destabilizationLoop()” that “breaks apart any process that acts as a
continuously iterating power” (“Queer Technologies /
transCoder”). Another project that probes the possibilities of
queerness and DH is “Queer OS: A User’s Manual.” Created by Fiona
Barnett et al, these guidelines describe how various components of an
operating system, such as interfaces, applications, and memory
function unexpectedly within an ethos of queerness.

### Experimentation, Exploration, Error
Although the speculative nature of these projects troubles the
positivist tendencies of mainstream DH, allowing critics to imagine
the emergence of queered technological contexts where functionality
and productivity are not taken for granted, it overlooks the ways in
which current technological systems and tools already contain elements


of queerness and encourage queer encounters with text.[fn:3]
"Queerness" in my project operates on three levels. First, on the
level of subjectivity, signifying nonnormative sexualities, desires,
and embodiments. Second, on the level of physicality, where bodies and
media are bound by the constraints of their material instantiation, in
the concrete but elusive processes of "mind" and "computation." Third,
in an affective relation between critic and text that offers up
alternative reading practices. My project seeks to carve out this
queer experience of reading literature by approaching media, bodies,
and text as sensuous in their materiality.

In resisting the impulse for fixity, certainty, and verification, I
emphasize how digital tools and methods promote experimentation and
exploration, and revel in the inconsistencies, errors, and
idiosyncrasies of close reading. My analysis looks to the ways that
both human minds and computers are prone to making mistakes and
misreadings, and takes these ironies as points of inspiration for
re-imagining human-computer interactions. In reviewing various digital
methods that engage reading and interpretive processes, such as
electronic editing, social reading tools, and archival practices, I’m
interested in how the logics and limitations of technology reflect the
complexities of identity and engage questions about queer embodied
experience and subjectivity. Here, I focus on life writing and
compositional forms, particularly memoirs, journals, and manuscripts
by queer authors, to highlight the construction and legibility of
queer embodiment and subjecthood. How do digital tools allow us to
"encode" or "decode" queerness in texts that trouble the stability of
a writing self?
 
### Touching without Touching
At stake throughout my project is the critic's relation to the object
of study. Some DH practitioners have already proposed useful models
for reading that emphasize the critic's role in analysis, such as
"algorithmic criticism," "deformative criticism," and "speculative
computing."[fn:4] These approaches are careful to temper the common
reductions and rhetoric of "distant reading" by being explicit about
the constructed nature of data and the implicatedness of the literary
critic in analysis. In parallel to these developments, Queer Theory
has also been exploring new relations to textual objects, resisting
"suspicious" or "paranoid" reading practices which attempt to uncover
hidden or latent "truths" about queer experience in favor of affective
orientations.[fn:5] Bringing this attitude in Queer Theory to bear on
digital methodologies, my project experiments with notions of "touch"
and more playful and experimental modes of reading that resist the
temptations to fix knowledge about queer subjects.[fn:6] The mode of
"touch" combines lightness with depth---although "touch" is soft, it
can leave a mark or impression between critic and object of
study. Toward a reading practice that prevents the overidentification
or determination of queer subjects,[fn:7] "touch" demonstrates what DH
what might learn from queer models of relationality while also
animating the haptic and physical experience of engaging with texts in
electronic formats where users must swipe, drag, and click their
way. This reading method aims to expose what happens when we use
digital media to engage with queer subjects.

### Life Writing by Queer Authors
Moving from method to matter, "queer" denotes not only a reading
practice but also a textual corpus that features queer authors and
subjects. This textual corpus in particular adds compositional forms
to the larger category of what Sidonie Smith and Julia Watson call
"life writing."[fn:8] Smith and Watson's capacious term, "life
writing," which centers on a writing self, leaves out drafting and
other more raw and experimental modes of writing that interrogate
selfhood by posing it as an iterative practice. Therefore, to various
examples of life writing, such as autobiography, memoir, fictionalized
autobiography and autofiction, I include compositional forms of
writing like journals, diaries, and manuscripts. Here, I focus on the
way that these texts demonstrate a writing self or an experimental
style that reflects the fragmentary and accumulative nature of queer
subjecthood and provides a key into reading affective, embodied
experience. For example, I explore how the manuscripts and journals of
Oscar Wilde, Virginia Woolf, and Katherine Mansfield continually call
into question the construction of embodied subjectivity. These
concerns with subjectivity extend into fictional works, such as
Woolf's /Orlando/ and Djuna Barnes's /Nightwood/, whose formal
experiments stage the false distinctions between fantasy and
reality,[fn:9] and culminate in 21st-century "autofiction" by Alison
Bechdel, Jordy Rosenberg, Yiyun Li, and Carmen Maria Machado, which
continue trouble the line between fiction and biography while also
posing problems for keeping subjectivity both legible and dynamic.

### Cyborgs
My project adopts the cyborg as a figure for queer embodiment that is
assembled yet unseamed. Since Judith Butler's seminal troubling of
gender in the early 90s, incoherences between sex, gender, and
sexuality have constituted queer subjectivity. My project explores how
these incoherences reverberate across neuroscientific and new media
technical contexts in order to inform human-computer computer
interactions. First, I embark on studies of embodied cognition,
examining how neuroscientific discourses situate perceptual processes
(such as reading) in the body. Within these discourses, I focus on
feminist accounts that center bodily difference in understanding
cognition. Second, I delve into new media studies, particularly media
archaeology, to examine the unexpected idiosyncracies of digital
media. Here, I explore how the physical processes of inscription,
processing, and storage disrupt our assumptions about digital
immateriality, what Matt Kirschenbaum calls "screen essentialism."
Situating consciousness and computation as /material/ allows me to
re-imagine Donna Haraway's cyborg as operating across
biological-mechanical registers, opening up the illuminating parallels
between the body and computer, for example, between neurons and
transistors, memory and RAM. Interrogating the ways that certain
perceptual and computational processes work across biological and
mechanical levels sparks my thinking about human-machine
interactions. Here, I speculate on how language marks us, triggers our
emotions and memories to create aesthetic, affective reading
experiences.

### Toward Disability
My emphasis on queer relationality as a critical method for working
with digital media naturally leads me to theorizing about the
unexpected interactions humans have with their world. Here, I'm
interested in the potential for queer digital tools to facilitate
aesthetic encounters between reader and object. By opening up the way
we use the digital tools to considerations about our embodied
experience with them, we expand our understanding about human-compuer
interactions beyond traditional knowledge structures and discipline
boundaries. To fully explore models of knowing based on feeling, I
turn to new media, new materialism, and disability studies. Thinkers
as ranged as Steven Shaviro, Jane Bennett, John Durham Peters, and
Mark Hansen, offer models that prioritize sensuous and aesthetic
experience over epistemology. For example, Steven Shaviro, who draws
from Alfred N. Whitehead's concept of "prehension," argues that
feeling is the primordial form of experience, where humans are
compelled to speculate or "think outside [their] own thought" in the
form of aesthetic semblances (155-6). Moving to disability studies,
Victoria Pitts-Taylor draws the concept of "mis/fitting" into models
of embodied cognition in order to present disability as a temporally
and spatially specific attempt at connection (or "fitting") between
the human body and its surrounding world. In concretizing the
interactions between man and machine as aesthetic and sensory, these
models complicate the easy encoding or decoding of queer embodied
experience. Throughout my project, I look at electronic editing
schemas that mark elusive subjectivities, digital annotation tools
that visualize affective responses to reading, and archival
digitization efforts that animate the past.

### Chapter Descriptions

Each chapter of my project takes up a different aspect of digital
media to explore a facet of this central question: How do our current
digital tools facilitate queer encounters with literature? This
examination addresses various digital tools across reading, editing,
teaching, and archiving, to push against the idea that these methods
are somehow more objective, rational, or verifiable than traditional
practices. My first chapter asks what digital methods have to learn
from Queer Theory, and lays out a model of relationality that guides
the rest of my project. My second chapter turns to a popular editing
standard for text encoding, and posits how this method might encode
embodied experience. My third chapter describes a classroom experiment
with a social annotation tool that visualizes nonverbal and affective
responses to reading. My final chapter explores how archival practices
subvert existing structures of knowledge and access, and point to the
ways that digital media engages theories of queer temporality. Though
these chapters range over a variety of tools and areas of study, they
are constrained by a investment to seek out queerness with our
existing digital methodologies.

The first chapter, "Reading: 'Touching without Touching,'" lays out
what Digital Humanities methodologies might learn from Queer
Theory. This chapter looks at specific reading practices by Eve
Kosofsky Sedgwick and Heather Love, which question the proper
relationship of the critic to the object of study. Sedgwick's ideas
about "touching/feeling" and Love's notion of "touching without
touching" pose queer modes of relationality that do not presume full
connections as prerequisite for analysis. This chapter engages these
techniques with various critical methods from the Digital Humanities,
including distant, surface, and post-critical reading, and
deformative, algorithmic, and speculative criticism. I pay particular
attention to how digital formats and interfaces might facilitate queer
critical methods, and I speculate on the intimate process of engaging
with literature on a computer, where users can manipulate and
transform text in virtually infinite and unique ways. Comparing three
very different kinds of digital projects based on text manipulation,
including the text analysis web application /Voyant-Tools/, the text
encoding archive, /Women Writers Online/, and a hypertext novella by
Caitlin Fischer, /These Waves of Girls/, I explain how these tools
work alongside the reader’s intuition, in what Jerome McGann calls a
“prosthetic extension of that demand for critical reflection,” by
which the reader is able to feel her way through the text (18). In
particular, I find that the haptic and exploratory activity of working
with these tools enlivens the reading process by allowing the reader
to play, experiment, and imagine new connections to the textual
object.

The second chapter, "Editing: Encoding Embodiment," examines the
instability of queer identity and subjecthood against the limitations
and fixities of computational methods. How do the abstractions and
structures of digital formats register the complexities of embodied
experience and identity? To answer this question, I examine how one
might edit, or "encode" manuscripts, diaries, and autofiction that
display queer struggles with subjecthood. First, I explore TEI (the
Text Encoding Initiative), an encoding standard or "markup language"
for electronic editing, and its method for handling complex textual
data. Here, I use TEI to mark up Oscar Wilde's manuscript of /The
Picture of Dorian Gray/, which was repeatedly edited by Wilde to
minimize homoerotic content. How might editors approach the rigidity
of encoding standards in order to address embodied experience present
in tonal shifts, elisions, and revisions over time?  Throughout my
conversation about /Dorian Gray/, I bring up examples of modernist
diaries by Virginia Woolf and Katherine Mansfield to multiply the
alternative figurations of queer selfhood. Finally, in an example of
21st-century autofiction by Yiyun Li, /Dear Friend, from my Life I
Write to you in your Life/, I show how these figurations of queerness
endure over time and across subject identities. This examination finds
that queer experience is never fully legible, despite our tools.

The third chapter, "Teaching: Social Annotation," questions how
digital annotation tools might facilitate embodied interactions with
text. To begin to answer this question, I examine biological processes
of perception and analogies between man and machine, taking up the
figure of the cyborg. This figure of human-computer engagement allows
me to address the unexpected affinities that emerge in the interface
between reader and text. Taking social annotation as a test case, I
examine a particular digital annotation tool that I've modified for
purposes of marking prediscursive responses to reading, by which I
mean the reactions and sensations that occur prior to articulated
response. As a digital component of my dissertation, this annotation
tool is built to resist the tendency of other annotation tools (and
educational technology solutions more generally) to track, quantify,
and assess student performance. Instead of having users type their
comments, my tool offers a highlighter in primary colors, red, yellow,
and blue. Due to their very low opacities, these colors can be
layered, one over another, to create secondary and tertiary color
combinations. When used with a social reading context, I imagine that
the color layerings will create a "heatmap" of different reactions to
the text. This pedagogical experiment hypothesizes that alternative
reactions to reading will materialize in the color mixtures, in the
alchemy of dissonances that layering creates. I run experiments in
reading Virginia Woolf's /Orlando/, Djuna Barnes’s /Nightwood/, and
Roland Barthes's /Roland Barthes by Roland Barthes/. I examine how
annotation might harness cognition, affect, and embodiment as formal
strategies in these texts.

The fourth chapter, "Archiving: Feeling Backward / Feed Forward,"
explores queer temporality's connection to new media in order to
disrupt typical notions of the archive. How do displacements across
our understanding of media, perception, and time affect our experience
with literary objects in the archive? How might new media animate the
past? Here, various displacements between our encounter with digitized
literary and cultural objects and their functionality offer a model
for thinking about our interaction with these objects. I embark on a
deep reading of digital media, exploring the central displacement
between what we see on the screen and what is inscribed in the
computer’s hardware—--what Matt Kirschenbaum calls the levels of
formal and forensic materiality. I consider these levels of digital
materiality alongside theories of temporality and perception from
queer theory and new media studies. What does queerness as
anticipatory (José Munoz's "not here yet") or backward looking
(Heather Love's "feeling backward") have in common with ideas about
new media changing our perceptual experience of the world (Mark
Hansen's "feed forward")?[fn:10] My deep reading of computer hardware
and software evokes the temporal and sensory displacements from queer
theory to offer possibilities for animating the archive. This chapter
considers a community archive, the /Lesbian Herstory Archive/ in
Brooklyn, New York, alongside 21st-century autofiction with archival
themes by Alison Bechdel, Carmen Maria Machado, and Jordy
Rosenberg. How do community archival practices and digitization
efforts change our assumptions about what counts as "archival"? This
examination of 21st-century autofiction refigures the ideas of
archival preservation and animation in print, demonstrating how these
authors write through enduring (im)possibilities of writing the self.


### Footnotes

[fn:1] These theorists take different stances on whether DH tools
facilitate more objective, or what Franco Moretti calls “falsifiable,"
method of criticism, where graphs and other visualizations might
answer questions about literary history and form, or a more
“speculative” mode, championed by Johanna Drucker, who purposefully
skews graphical metrics in order to reflect the ambiguity and
partiality of the data they represent. In between these two extremes,
theorists like Andrew Piper and Ted Underwood, temper the reductions
and rhetoric of "distant reading" by incorporating close readings and
explanations, and Catherine D'Ignazio and Lauren Klein, recover
emotion and emobodiment to indict traditional data science as an
exclusionary discipline.

[fn:2] Recently, Nan Z. Da deems Computational Literary Studies (CLS)
ineffective when her own experiments fail to reproduce or verify the
results of her colleagues. Her emphasis on the “reproducible” in CLS
extends Moretti’s call from 1983 for a “falsifiable criticism”: both
advocate for a methodology that is as reliable and verifiable as the
social sciences.

[fn:3] The elasticity of the term "queer" has been critiqued since
Judith Butler's invocation in 1993 that "queer" must "never be fully
owned but always and only redeployed, twisted, queered from a prior
usage" (19). One dominant redeployment in the early 21st century,
summarized by David Eng, Judith Halberstam, and José Munoz, orients
the transgressive associations of the term (which previously attached
to transgressive sexualities) around the political urgency of global
issues such as neoliberalism, the war on terror, migration, the
environment, etc. More recently, Kadji Amin approaches the term as
"sticky with history," rather than fluid and multiple, to re-anchor
"queer" to its affective and political moment of its emergence in the
1980s and 90s (181).

[fn:4] See Stephen Ramsay, /Reading Machines: Toward an Algorithmic
Criticism/, 2011, Jerome McGann and Lisa Samuels, "Deformance and
Interpretation," in /Radiant Textuality: Literary Studies after the
World Wide Web/, 2001, Johanna Drucker, /SpecLab: Digital Aesthetics
and Projects in Speculative Computing/, 2009.

[fn:5] According to critics like Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick, Heather Love,
and Rita Felski, the logic of exposure closes off alternative
possibilities for responding to texts.

[fn:6] Heather Love and Kelly Caldwell theorize that the pain and
suffering in by queer subjects is irredeemable, that the bodily and
psychic costs of homophobia cannot be alleviated or redressed.

[fn:7] Both Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick and Heather Love explicitly discuss
"touch" as an affective orientation for critical analysis: Sedgwick
for the purpose of promoting spatial over teleological relations
("beside" rather than "beneath") and Love..... prefers to dwell in the
painful past, giving inconsolable characters full reign over their own
darkness.

[fn:8] Sidonie Smith and Julia Watson define "life writing" as "a
general term for writing that takes a life, one’s own or another’s, as
its subject. Such writing can be biographical, novelistic, historical,
or explicitly self-referential and therefore autobiographical" (4).

[fn:9] Barnes's /Nightwood/ is not traditionally considered to be a
fictionalized biography, though it is widely accepted as a roman à
clef in which Barnes herself takes the character of Nora Flood and her
former lover, Thelma Ellen Wood, is Robin Vote.

[fn:10] Mark Hansen's concept of "feed-forward" considers how new media
expands perceptual reaches across new environments while
marginalizing the direct apprehension of objects. 
