one
===

chapter summary

This dissertation looks at new ways of reading *queer bodies* and *queer
experience* within technological contexts. How do digital tools and
platforms change the way we interact with affect (associated with queer
experience and embodiment) within texts? What about the digital allows
us to activate *sensational* reading experiences? In other words, how
does digital media interface with queerness?

This chapter proposes a reading methodology that leverages the critic's
relationship to the text to open possibilities for interpretation and
connections to the textual material. It explores the ways that reading
practices across two different fields (digital humanities and queer
theory) intertwine, and how this creates a new method for reading queer
narratives in digital contexts.

First, queerness is established as something that can only be touched at
a distance. It is defined as a desire for touch (digital touch), a
desire that cannot be satisfied, redeemed, or recovered. This impulse to
satisfy, redeem, or recover queerness is observed in “paranoid” or
“suspicious” reading practices, which seek to answer or discover the
“hidden” meaning within text. These practices attempt to answer
questions, but do so in a way that constrains inquiry, because paranoia
only delivers the results that are *imaginable* within current the
knowledge structures. To avoid reproducing these knowledge structures,
we must look to strategies that do not assume full connections, like
*feeling backward* and *queer form*. We value abstraction, which is
necessary for bringing things into relation, and opacity, which keeps
the unknowable nature of queer experience and identity somewhat in tact.
We look at *Confessions of the Fox*, *These Waves of Girls*,
*Borderlands*.

Second, we examine a similar impulse in DH---and a parallel across the
status of queerness and data, which cannot be captured in their raw
forms. The history of computing and media shows how tools were built in
ways that are not neutral, and we find DH practitioners doing work that
is critical of digital methods. Looking at the example of DH from the
position of queerness we see more clearly the necessity of opacity,
formalization, and abstraction as reading methods, and the real danger
of reproducibility and totalization, byproducts of paranoia. We find
parallels between queer critics and feminist DHers, who are doing
something similar; we interweave Saidiya Hartman and Lauren Klein.

Third, we propose three values for queer DH, which is: novelty (the
performative), vantages (the visual), and provisionality (the
ontological). We see these examples in *voyant-tools*, *these waves of
girls*, and /the orlando project/(?).

Touch: a way of reading: Rosenberg, Fischer, Munoz, Anzaldua
------------------------------------------------------------

touch intersects queer and digital, abstracting sense

If digital humanists and queer theorists are going to find some common
ground, they might start with *touch*. Touch is a means of interfacing
with the world, a mode of encounter between subject and object. It
signifies a method of knowing based on feeling, which can amplify
sensation beyond the readily sensible. The root of the word digital,
"digitus," comes from the Latin word for finger or toe, and within the
context of electronic media, it refers to a counting system based on ten
digits[^1]. Associations between the digital and touch expand from
numerical computation to include the haptic connections made through the
intermediaries of mice, keyboards, and touch screens. To touch
something, the digits extend, the furtherest appendage still part of the
coherent body, and establish contact. Touch relates to queerness through
the desire for touching that which is untouchable. It signifies a lack
of access to the source of its desire.

A complicated thesis about touch which this chapter will unpack: At the
intersection of queerness and the digital, touch operates by abstracting
its object through the intermediary of the sensible. This process of
abstraction compensates for the core condition of queerness, which is
untouchable, unknowable, and inexpressible. By transforming the
inaccessible source into new forms, *queer forms*, queerness is
exponentially sensualized and engaging. Within digital queer literary
materials, touch is a *reading method* that works by abstracting the
senses to provide more possibilities for connection.

queerness and the denial of touch: confessions

For queer subjects, the desire to touch has always been a frought
experience. In *The Confessions of the Fox* by Jordy Rosenberg, the main
character displays how a troubled relationship to touch indicates a
complex subjectivity. Based in eighteenth century London, this story
follows Jack Sheppard, a young transgender male making his way as a wily
thief through corrupt and dirty London underground. In the time before
the pathologization of nonnormative sexual and gender identities,
Sheppard struggles to articulate his difference, what he calls his
"*Something*," from the rest of London society: "This something that set
him apart from other coves \[men\]. Something that had caus'd him to
dress his own chest in taut bandages... pinching at his ribs, throttling
his every Breath to a forced shallow bird-sipping of the air" (33). The
difficulty with self-identification and categorization extends from the
main character to the narrative's genre, which unfolds as historical
fiction overlaid with contemporary memoir. Sheppard's story is
discovered in the present day by Dr. Voth, a rueful academic, also
transgender, who immediately realizes the significance of Sheppard's
manuscript for the historical record. Voth proceeds to annotate the
document with relevant references and increasingly, his own anecdotes
tangential to the narrative. In one scene, Sheppard is having a romantic
moment with his lover, Bess Khan, a bi-racial prostitute who initiates
Jack into the London underground society of rogues, when Voth relates
his own story about his former lover from the early days of their
relationship:

> She opened her legs a bit, twitched them open, really. I caught my
> breath, audibly.
>
> "Oh my god," she said, "you're such a lesbian."
>
> She didn't mean it cruelly. And she didn't mean that I wasn't passing
> as a cis-man, either. Although, since according to her we'd fucked the
> night before, she knew exactly how un-cis I was.
>
> She meant that she saw something about the quality of my desire: that
> *I could feel her even before I touched her* \[my emphasis\]. And that
> this was part of what it meant to be---or to have been, before my tits
> became property of the California Municipal Waste Department---a
> lesbian. That a woman moving in your line of sight could have an
> effect that was total, atmospheric. That you could be hesitant,
> incapable, and not particularly interested in establishing a line
> between touching and seeing. That you would indulge a dead love, dead
> in the eyes of the world, and valueless. A love that choked and
> burdened the mind, that might even be the very foundation of
> melancholy and despair. But, oh Reader, looking at a woman you really
> get a feel for the way that fire is a phenomenon of touch. And my
> point is, if you have every been a lesbian, you will not even have to
> touch a woman to know that. (169)

The desire for touching is often frustrated by normative expectations.
Here, desire is characterised not by the search for satisfaction, or the
success of establishing connection, but by the sensual fullness of a
lack. The experience of desire, of craving, wanting, needing to touch
the desired object, stimulates the imagination and amplifies sensations
that would otherwise be replaced with more "direct" modes of contact.
Bringing this distinction between imaginary and real contact to the
realm of identity, Dr. Voth's lover refers to him as a "lesbian,"
despite his having already transitioned to a male gender identity. The
term fits because it signals not a gender identity but a *mode of being*
that is more concerned with the visible, which portends the potential of
connection, rather than verifiable contact. With regard to desire, the
difference hinges on the role of the imagination in activating certain
sensors and receptors that cannot be accessed in the "real," actualized
world. Here, fancy takes on the connotations of the fanciful; desire
grows in the realm of the imagination. But this does not mean the
sensations resulting from this desire are any less palpable and sensual;
on the contrary, such a desire heightens and indeed maximizes physical
experience. This mode of desiring is what characterizes queerness in the
text: a desire for something that, because it cannot or will not be
fulfilled, amplifies the fullness of that desire. Touch, or the lack of
touch, defines a peculiarly queer experience in the novel.

Queerness is concerned with contact and desire, and more precisely with
*the desire for contact*. Another text, wildly different in form,
carries a similar message about frustrated desire constituting
queerness..,....

touch severs, divides subj/obj: waves

This leads us to the main problem with touch: it goes both ways. What I
touch also touches me; one body impressed by or in collision with
another. Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick explains that "the sense of touch makes
nonsense out of any dualistic understanding of agency and passivity; to
touch is always already to reach out, to fondle, to heft, to tap, or to
enfold" (13). Touch engages a range of relations where power is not
always reduced to opposition. The sensation of touch often obscures this
dual effect. Some bodies appear to desire touching rather than being
touched; sometimes, the desire for touch does not seek contact, but the
fullness of desiring. it is bidirectional, reveals a subject/object
divide.

Touch reconciles -- anzaldua, sedgwick, munoz

Touch reconciles the inherent connection between bodies, something that
heteronormativity tries to suppress. For things to not touch, to be
severed or "objectified," moves them into a relation of violence. Gloria
Anzaldua explains that separation is brutal: "In trying to become
'objective,' Western culture made 'objects' of things and people when it
distanced itself from them, thereby losing 'touch' with them. This
dichotomy is the root of all violence" (37). Losing touch is a
prerequisite for exploitation. The sundering of "objects" from our touch
primes us to take advantage of them. Colonial history is a case study in
losing touch: "White America has only attended to the body of the earth
in order to exploit it, never to succor it or to be nurtured in it"
(68). Anzaldua's *mestiza*, birthed in the open wound of the border,
"where the Third World grates against the first and bleeds," is an
attempt to bring together what has been separated (3). Those who live on
the border know better than anyone--divisions between bodies puts those
bodies into conflict.

Touch offers myriad ways of relation. Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick offers touch
as a way of connecting to objects that evades "dualistic thought," that
is, in "binary" thought, where things are presumed to be discrete and
opposed.

### [TODO]{.todo .TODO} /Cruising Utopia/: queerness is desire for the not here {#cruising-utopia-queerness-is-desire-for-the-not-here}

Muñoz re-articulates queerness as something "not yet here” (*Cruising
Utopia* 1) It is not only as projection into the future but also as
projection of a certain futurity into and onto the present and the past.

"Queerness is a structuring and educated mode of desiring that allows us
to see and feel beyond the quagmire of the present... Queerness is a
longing that propels us onward, beyond romances of the negative and
toiling in the present. Queerness is that thing that lets us feel that
this world is not enough, that indeed something is missing" (*Cruising
Utopia* 1).

Queerness, Muñoz argues, is a “horizon of being” (Husserl 1991) that can
be glimpsed in utopian bonds, affiliations, designs, and gestures that
exist within the present, “a type of affective excess that presents the
enabling force of a forward-dawning futurity” (23). The crucial
dialectical articulation of the “no longer conscious” with the “not
yet”: Muñoz archives what has been lost, and what we are continuing to
lose, in the long, sad shift from the sexually revolutionary energies of
the fifties and sixties to their neoliberal neutralization.

### [TODO]{.todo .TODO} /Waves/: queerness (story) is frustrating closure, eluding touch {#waves-queerness-story-is-frustrating-closure-eluding-touch}

*These Waves of Girls*, a hypertext novella by Caitlin Fisher, is an
autobiographical account of Caitlin Fisher's sexual coming-of-age. The
narrative unfolds in a series of vignettes or "nodes," connected to each
other by associative hyperlinks, that recount Fischer's adolescent
experiences with men and women when she was growing up in England.
Despite winning the 2001 Electronic Literature Award, this hypertext
draws much criticism for its form that precludes a straightforward
reading experience. Through the profusion of hyperlinks, which connect
one node to the next, hypertext can frustrate the reader’s desire for
narrative coherence, temporal and causal relations. The relatively
comfortable and conventional reading practice of turning the pages in a
codex dissolves in the distracting and technical complexity of a
narrative that requires what Espen Aarseth calls “untrivial effort” to
traverse (1). An empirical study on reader responses to the
fragmentation of narrative structure finds that the “heavy cognitive
demands of the interfaces used by hyper-writers” on the reader" lead to
reader frustration, dissapointment, and low engagement (Pope “Where do
we Go from Here?” 75). Speaking on *Waves* in particular, James Pope
argues that the use of hyperlinks “present\[s\] a baffling range of
choices for movement which actually led to a stifling of movement
altogether” (“Significance”). Joining Pope, Anja Rau criticizes the
overabundance of options for movement within the hypertext, as well as
its poor design and lack of significant markers. She comes to the
similar conclusion that these elements diminish the reader’s absorption
in the narrative.

\[!\[Watch the video\](./videos/erotic.mp4)\]

"DARE" &gt; \[arrow\] &gt; \[arrow\] &gt; "I liked girls..." &gt; "the
lover" &gt; "Only one of us is 15..." &gt; "Jerk off…"

I want to draw attention to this disorienting feeling of reading this
text. Episodes do not have a discernible chronology or progression. They
are non-linear, and clicking on the links is disruptive to any sense of
coherence. There’s a desire for narrative coherence and closure, which
is continually frustrated by the work’s form. Yet, in another sense, the
fragmentary structure of the narrative is exactly what constitutes its
appeal, as it compels the reader to chase an elusive understanding of
sexuality. The text continually defies the reader’s expectations about
the narrator. In the repeatedly linked node, aptly titled “erotic,” the
ticker reads “and it was the most erotic year of my life” across the
screen in ticker tape (“And it was...”). This node is reached through
two different sources, both of which feature sexual episodes between the
narrator and men. In a novella that largely consists of stories about
the narrator’s sexual histories and fantasies with other women, this
node is unexpected. It checks the reader’s expectations about the
narrator’s homosexuality against the possibility that she is more
satisfied with men. There are other moments in the text that also create
a similar dissonance from the associations between links. One of these
associations occurs in the last node of the “beam routine” episode, when
the narrator is about to perform her beam routine to sexually placate
the man that she brought home. The link reads “I don’t want to have
sex,” and it leads the reader to an episode about her experience with a
woman:

> I’m in bed with Jennie Winchester and I realize she want me to undo
> her pants. She needs to be home by 11:00 and needs to leave my place
> by 10:45. I’m kissing her but opening my eyes at intervals to catch
> the clock. At exactly 10:43 I unbutton her Levis and shove my hand
> inside, barely undoing the zipper. “I’m in bed...”

Now the reader experiences a previous node from a new link that casts
its former meaning into doubt. Is the narrator watching the clock
because she wants to make the most of her time with Jennie, or is she
counting the minutes until she is free of Jennie’s presence? What before
seemed straightforward now appears to support alternate readings.

The reader’s frustration in navigating through *Waves* relates to the
work’s central theme of narration as seduction, which reinforces an
approach toward queerness as something elusive, a process that will
never be complete. Narration as seduction works by piquing the reader's
interest in the story, propelling her through hyperlinks across the
various nodes, and repeatedly frustrating her desire for closure or
resolution. The reader’s continually thwarted desire for narrative
coherence enacts the themes of sexual discovery and seduction that the
narrator experiences within the space of the story.

1.  Waves form: critics on the form opening possibilities for reading

    The reader’s experience of frustration and desire in navigating
    through the story mirrors the themes of sexual frustration and
    desire within the story. The electronic format of the story is what
    allows this theme to surface, for me. As I follow this disorienting
    narrative, I similarly enter into cycles of desire and frustration.
    This affective reaction is only possible through a displacement---a
    formal displacement that uses electronic media to re-organize,
    re-structure and display the story in the way we encounter it.

    Larry McCaffery, the fiction judge who awarded Fisher the ELO prize,
    praises the hyperfiction’s use of fragmentation to present
    anecdotes, bits of story and meditations in a way that liberates the
    story’s potential: "Fisher creates an interconnected web of
    branching, narrative possibilities" (“Comments”). Rather than feel
    paralyzed by the variety of options, McCafferty regards such options
    as liberating the traditionally pre-determined text into something
    more malleable, and therefore, more relatable, to the reader.
    Jessica Laccetti also lauds Waves’ indeterminate reading experience,
    saying that it cannot have defined beginnings, section divisions, or
    endings. Each time the reader sits down and opens this hypertext, it
    is different; depending on the chosen order of node, the reader will
    derive new meaning from that reading. She argues that, “as the
    narrative sequencing changes, so does our understanding of reading”
    (180). By constantly rearranging the order of its nodes,
    hyperfictions like Waves creates new, unique narratives,
    “enabl\[ing\] numerous possibilities for beginnings and, therefore,
    sequentialities” (Laccetti 180).

    Roland Barthes offers a theory about the reader’s affective response
    to the text that illuminates how hypertext may use linking as a
    narrative strategy to engage, rather than dissuade, the reader. In
    The Pleasure of the Text, Barthes describes two ways that texts
    provoke reactions by appealing to the reader’s “readerly” or
    “writerly” faculties. The text may stimulate pleasure or bliss in
    the reader depending on the degree to which its language disrupts
    his reading experience. On the one hand, the text of pleasure, or
    the “readerly” text, is “the text that contents, fills, grants
    euphoria; the text that comes from culture and does not break with
    it, is linked to a comfortable practice of reading” (all italics
    original; 14). The text of bliss, the “writerly” text, on the other
    hand, is one “that imposes a state of loss, the text that
    discomforts (perhaps to the point of a certain boredom), unsettles
    the reader’s historical, cultural, psychological assumptions, the
    consistency of his tastes, values, memories, brings to a crisis his
    relation with language” (14). The important difference here is the
    extent to which the text stimulates affects that actively push the
    reader away or disrupt his reading. The text of pleasure operates
    according to the principles of narrative suspense that drive
    traditional stories, like cause and effect, while the text of bliss
    negates these principles: “what pleasure wants is the site of loss,
    the seam, the cut, the deflation, the dissolve which seizes the
    subject in the midst of bliss” (Barthes 7). In other words, the text
    of bliss is an interruption of the comfortable reading experience
    that emphasizes the reader’s position as a subject. According to
    Barthes, the text of bliss is a positive experience for the reader
    insofar as he enjoys this interruption: “the subject gains access to
    bliss by the cohabitation of languages working side by side: the
    text… is a sanctioned babel” (4). Barthes description here applies
    nicely to the structure of hypertext fiction, in which different
    texts are embedded quite literally side by side in the form of
    hyperlinks: insofar as the reader “sanctions” these texts, he will
    experience them as texts of bliss.

    From its table of contents, the novella foregrounds the reader’s
    agency in navigating through its fragmentary structure, where the
    reader encounters a navigation page that lists eight main sections,
    or chapters, of the narrative. These sections are named “kissing
    girls,” “school tales,” “I want her,” “city,” “country,” “she was
    warned,” “dare,” and “her collections.” When the reader pans over
    each chapter title, a textual blurb appears containing an excerpt
    from that chapter, which often draw from a sexual episode that
    stimulate reader's interest in that chapter, enticing her onward.
    For example, the excerpt for “I want her” presents an erotic moment
    between the narrator and one of her lovers, Jennie.:

    > I’m in bed with Jennie Winchester and I realize she want me to
    > undo her pants. She needs to be home by 11:00 and needs to leave
    > my place by 10:45. I’m kissing her but opening my eyes at
    > intervals to catch the clock. At exactly 10:43 I unbutton her
    > Levis and shove my hand inside, barely undoing the zipper. “I’m in
    > bed...”

    The narrator severs the excerpt at a moment of climax, tempting the
    reader to click through to the next node. Another section heading,
    “dare,” displays a similar strategy: “Fay Devlin and I are playing
    spin the bottle. She spins, but she trembles. By the time we get to
    Truth or Dare, I have my lips on her nipple and I’ve made her do the
    asking” (“These Waves of Girls…”). These excerpts establish the
    reader’s agency and the novel’s fragmentary structure from the
    outset of the novella. Because the chapters are unnumbered, the
    reader must determine how to proceed through the sections of the
    novella by making decisions about which to read first. These
    previews function to entice the reader to click through to read the
    rest of that section. And while the table of contents hints at the
    existence of an underlying structure to the narrative, that
    structure also reveals itself to be founded on fragments. In this
    way, the reader’s first encounter with the text portends that she
    may never get the whole story, yet encourages her onward.

    In fact, as this semblance of narrative organization all but
    disappears beyond the table of contents, it becomes increasingly
    clear that the reader fully controls the order of nodes. After
    progressing from the navigation page, the reader’s options multiply
    exponentially, and these options compete for the reader’s selection.
    In order to proceed through the text, the reader is forced to decide
    from the abundance of choices. On this particular node, reached from
    the “I want her” chapter title on the table of contents, hyperlinks
    run up and down the left side of the screen and populate the main
    text. Clicking through the first link in the main text, “Jennie,”
    the reader reaches a node with nine links. Again, how does she
    choose to proceed among these links? According to Barthes, the text
    of bliss wants to be read: “the text you write must prove to me that
    it desires me” (6). In deciding between the links that vie for her
    attention, the reader may follow her own impulsivity (she may simply
    click on the first link she sees, as she did on the previous page)
    or her interest in the word being linked. The node tells a story
    about Jennie and Tracey engaging in adolescent sexual exploits at
    summer camp. The links on this page include “been to that
    campground,” “It's grade 10,” “in my head I imagine a desperate love
    triangle,” “her hand under my shirt,” “the s l o w movements of
    Jennie's fingers,” “a dyke -- I know it -- but she won't do anything
    about it -- can't -- frozen,” “Close the lights,” “We try not to
    move too much, too loudly,” and “attended camp” (“Jennie only
    attended…”). At every node, the text proves again and again that it
    desires her. The reader may decide to read through this page, or
    read only a portion of the page, and interrupt her progress to click
    on a link. Or the reader may forgo reading this page altogether, and
    follow another link to a wholly new page. Either way, she makes a
    decision in order to proceed, and her decision determines the order
    of each node’s appearance. The text of bliss wants to be read, and
    the reader must decide how. By assembling the node into a specific
    order, the reader organizes the text of bliss according to the
    unique path that she chooses.

queerness as untouchable
------------------------

But there is a problem with touch as it applies to queer bodies. Some
bodies do not want to be touched (feinberg), and other bodies, even
through touch, do not get through to us (hartman?). Experience and
subjectivity of minoritarian subjects are incommensurable: vestiges of
meaning are lost in translation[^2]; or experiences struggle to be
captured or expressed in form [^3]. In short, for queer bodies, there is
a dual impulse, a desire to touch and be touched that coexists with the
inability for touch to satisfy, provide redemption, or avoid violation.

Respecting the right not to be touched, some queer theorists pursue
critical methods that prevent overidentification or overanalysis. They
resist reading practices, which have been called "suspicious reading" or
"paranoid reading"[^4], that seek to expose the effects of homophobic
prohibition and repression with the goal of affirming queer subjects or
recuperating their losses. Paranoid or suspicious reading is oriented
around finding and exposing the pain and shame of the closet in order to
turn them into sites of political resistance, liberation, or pride.

### Sedgwick's paranoid/suspicious reading

Such reading practices determine and constrain the ways that readers
engage with texts. To illustrate this effect, Sedgwick relates a
conversation between herself and a friend during few years of the AIDS
crisis, when speculation about the government's complicity in spreading
the virus is rampant. At the time, Sedgwick wonders whether "the lives
of African Americans are worthless in the eyes of the United States;
that gay men and drug users are held cheap where they aren't actively
hated" (123). Her friend counters this suspicion, pointing out that
knowledge of conspiracy doesn't achieve anything on its own: "Supposing
we were ever sure of all those things---what would we know then that we
don't already know?" (123). Merely knowing that something is true,
revealing the presence of systematic oppression, injustice,
discrimination, does nothing. As Sedgwick explains, knowledge of a
problem is not enough to "enjoin that person to any specific train of
epistemological or narrative consequences" (123). Moreover, a paranoid
or suspicious stance blocks out other possibilities for relation to the
text. Paranoia often only affirms itself; reflecting and replicating
itself in every surface, giving too much power to the act of exposure.
The work of paranoia is never done, "for all its vaunted suspicion,
\[paranoia\] acts as though its work would be accomplished if only it
could finally, this time, somehow get its story truly known" (141). Like
many other theorists, Sedgwick wonders what is the point of continually
trying to reveal, unravel, deconstruct the injustices of the past. She
searches for "some ways of understanding human desire that might be
quite to the side of prohibition and repression, that might hence be
structured quite differently from the heroic, 'liberatory,' inescapably
dualistic righteousness of hunting down and attacking
prohibition/repression in all its chameleonic guises" (10).

### paranoia and replication (the sciences)

In order to understand the ways that the paranoid impulse harm and
constrain inquiry, it is useful to view it at work in scientific
disciplines and for the purpose of historiography.

Some strains of scientific inquiry, in particular, shows us how paranoia
enacts a self-replicating mechanic. Though it appears in much of
literary studies, the impulse that drives paranoid reading is borrowed
from a critical viewpoint in scientific inquiry that assumes a detached
observer. Critiques of this position, particularly in Donna Haraway's
work on primatology, attempt to articulate a new mode of feminist
science that de-naturalizes the "natural." Haraway's research on
primates reveals the ways in which assumptions and preconceptions from
the (white, male) subject inflect the object of study. She examines how
scientists bring their own investments to bear even in the seemingly
benign questions they might ask, or qualities they isolate, as areas of
interest. For example, primatologists working with the goal of studying
social structures in the field often impose their own social structures
by turning their assumptions of male dominance into "observations."
Feminist scientists attempt to revise such narratives by emphasizing
organization and cooperation among primate communities: "revisionists
have stressed matrifocal groups, long-term social cooperation rather
than short-term spectacular aggression, flexible process rather than
strict structure” (19). Pointing out that, “Women know very well that
knowledge from the natural sciences has been used in the interests of
our domination and not our liberation," Harwaway asserts that such
revision is about empowering the subjugated, reconceiving “female
receptivity” as "female choice" (8). The creation of a subject/object
split *reproduces* and legitimizes hierarchies of domination.

Oftentimes, new tools can obscure the ways that we replicate our own
assumptions. The advent of photography in the mid-nineteenth century
allowed subjects to codify their prejudices as science, for example, in
the pictures of American slaves taken by Louis Agassiz in 1850. These
daguerrotypes, a pioneering practice in photography that uses
light-sensitive chemicals on silver plates, show how the impulse for
scientific classification impacts the quality and kind of knowledge that
results. Agassiz, a Swiss anthropologist, came to the United States to
study the physical differences between European whites and African
blacks, by examining the shape and character of their heads and torsos,
similar to contemporary studies in physionomy and phrenology that
analyzed the exterior form of the human body. Agassiz's goal was to
amass evidence to support his theory, that mankind had been separately
created and whites and blacks were in fact different species (Wallis
40). Using photography for anthropoligical purposes, and organizing
photographs to support a classification system, Agassiz's work
demonstrates how the apparent "objectivity" of the photograph can mask
the highly subjective motives for classification. Writing about the
photographs, which were exhibited by the Amon Carter Museum in 1992,
Brian Wallis explains that such images were organized to suggest
divisions between "self and other, healthy and diseased, normal and
pathological," with the insidious effect of "mask\[ing\] its subjective
distortions in the guise of logic and organization" (Wallis 47, 54-55).
The problem, Wallis points out, is the realism of the photographic tool
obscures the ways that subjects harness it to solidify their
preconceptions---"Strengthened by the seeming transparency of
photographic realism, these categories and the divisions between them
soon took on the authority of natural 'facts.' Supplying either too much
or too little information, photographs soon muddied the easy
distinctions between subjective knowledge and what was called
"objective." (47-48). The more seeminly transparent the tool, the easier
it is to wrangle it toward proving "self-evident" truths.

In this case, the apparent fidelity of the photographic tool to record
"nature" in fact obscures the ways that using the tool only reinforces a
preconceived notion of "nature." Wallis explains that, "Supplying either
too much or too little information, photographs soon muddied the easy
distinctions between subjective knowledge and what was called
'objective' (48). The photographs reinforce the ways that scientific
tools, which appear to capture "reality," can be harnessed and
manipulated toward the observer's purpose.

### [TODO]{.todo .TODO} add quote about tyranny of visual {#add-quote-about-tyranny-of-visual}

This is what is violent about analysis, the assumptions that we make
about others being fundamentally different and fundamentally knowable.

-   The tyranny of the visual: “At their base, such operations of
    surveillance and classification rely on the concept of immutable
    difference, on sharp boundaries, and on the possibility of
    exhaustively knowing the other” (Amin, Kadji, Amber Jamilla Musser,
    and Roy Pérez “Queer Form: Aesthetics, Race, and the Violences of
    the Social” ASAP/Journal, Volume 2, Number 2, May 2017, pp. 232).

### paranoia and recovery (historiography)

Not only does paranoid inquiry tend to replicate the assumptions of the
observer, but it blocks out other forms of knowledge. This is especially
evident in the work of historical recovery, in the impulse to find
"hidden" or "forgotten" meaning in textual and archival material.
Recovery works by a self-legitimizing and perpetuating logic that
attempts to render what has been left out, disregarded, or misunderstood
within the logic of dominance. It is Jacques Derrida's *archive fever*,
or the desire for legibility, under the auspices of the ruler, which
animates the endless search for origins. It is, in Haraway's words, a
search for the "one code that translates all meaning perfectly, the
central dogma of phallogocentrism" (*Simians, Cyborgs, and Women* 176).

The stakes of recovery work are uniquely stark in the history of the
Black Atlantic, where researchers must work to square the growth of an
inhuman practice within a historical narrative of progress and
liberalization. A tradition that rationalizes slavery with the right to
property, that justifies war through the social contract. Black Atlantic
scholars Lisa Lowe and Saidiya Hartman point out that the central
paradox of studying the archive of slavery is the structuring condition
of recovery. In her essay "History Hesitant," Lowe explains that because
recovery work necessarily occurs within the limits of the authorizing
power, it always subjects itself to that power. Rather that work under
these conditions, historians of enslaved experience ought to examine
this confining structure, "the archeology of knowledge through which the
archive subjects and governs precisely by means of instruments that
absent the humanity of the enslaved” (87). Researchers might examine,
for example, how "the slave trader’s desire to record, measure, list,
and account" weigh up against "rationalist claims to produce truth or
meaning about the terrors of captivity, enslavement, or torture" (88).
Saidiya Hartman similarly turns to the question of epistemology as the
crux of the recovery work: “If it is no longer sufficient to expose the
scandal, then how might it be possible to generate a different set of
descriptions from this archive?" (7).

Hartman's central problem is what to do with an absent archive. She
leaves us the paradox of recovery work: "How does one revisit the scene
of subjection without replicating the grammar of violence?" (4). Hartman
writes caustically about the impossibility of telling stories that have
been left out of the record. Not only that we can never recover these
stories (they are lost to time) but we can not approximate them with our
current tools, with language. In "Venus in Two Acts," Hartman tells the
story of Black Venus, the unnamed slave woman who appears variously
throughout the "offical" record:

> we could have as easily encountered her in a ship’s ledger in the
> tally of debits; or in an overseer’s journal—--“last night I laid with
> Dido on the ground”; or as an amorous bed-fellow with a purse so
> elastic “that it will contain the largest thing any gentleman can
> present her with” in Harris’s List of Covent- Garden Ladies; or as the
> paramour in the narrative of a mercenary soldier in Surinam; or as a
> brothel owner in a traveler’s account of the prostitutes of Barbados;
> or as a minor character in a nineteenth-century pornographic novel. 1

What draws all these iterations of Venus together is their silence, "no
one remembered her name or recorded the things she said, or observed
that she refused to say anything at all" (2). The fact of silence cuts
deeper than the failure of history but is part of the condition known as
the "violence of the archive," which denotes not only absence as a form
of evidence, in that the physical records are missing, but also in the
tools of expression, in language that cannot approximate the reality of
experience, and in the audible discourse that dictates silence.

### affective strategies, hestitation, restraint

Within the dominant culture, recovery means authorizing the structures
of knowledge that give rise to injustice in the first place. So what do
we do now? There are affects associated with this kind of impasse. We
hold ourselves back, restraint, avoidance. Lowe explains that

> Hesitation, rather than rushing to recover what has been lost, need
> not be understood as inaction or postponement, or as a thwarting of
> the wish to provide for a future world. Rather, it halts the desire
> for recognition by the present social order and staves off the
> compulsion to make visible within current epistemological orthodoxy.
> 98

Feelings of hesitation, doubt, dissapointment are ways of protecting the
archive of slavery from further exploitation.

To sum up: one solution to paranoid impulses involves is critical
awareness, the ability to access the affects that come between you and
the object of study.

### estrangement as central to queerness

“Editor’s Introduction”: Queering Archives, Intimate Tracings, 2015: The
estrangement that continually happens with dealing with queerness.
Estrangement from yourself, the materials, and others.

“Estrangement” --- the torment of queer literature -- the pain of not
identification but of not identifying. Of reading the text and finding
and not finding yourself in the pages.

### Heather Love's *Feeling Backward*

Heather Love offers a reading strategy that acknowledges queer
experience, particularly suffering, as unconsoleable. In resisting the
temptations to redeem psychic suffering by queer subjects, Heather Love
offers a strategy called "feeling-backward." This strategy opens a space
for bad feelings without trying to recuscitate, justify, or transform
them. She focuses on feelings such as "nostalgia, regret, shame,
despair, *ressentiment*, passivity escapism, self-hatred, withdrawal,
bitterness, defeatism, and loneliness," which, according to Love, are
tied to "the historical impossibility of same-sex desire" (4, emphasis
original). She examines the burdened protagonists from famous modernist
texts like Walter Pater's *The Renaissance: Studies in Art and Poetry*
(1873), Radclyffe Hall's *The Well of Loneliness* (1928), Willa Cather's
*My Ántonia* (1918), and Sylvia Townsend Warner's *Summer Will Show*
(1936). Love argues that the shame and stigma experienced by these
characters ought to be recognized rather than resolved. Instead of
turning negative histories into sites of resistance or affirmation,
these hurting characters might have full reign over their own darkness.
And this darkness must be where the critic will meet them.

### identification is risky; Caldwell

As readers, identifying with literary subjects is both dangerous and
seducticve. Identities within texts are not stable across time and
place, and acts of identification might collapse or overlook the
complexity of experience. For queer readers in particular,
identification often emerges from a desire to recognize within the past
something that affirms queer experience in the present. Love describes
queer critics, "Like demanding lovers \[who\] promise to rescue the past
when in fact they dream of being rescued themselves" (33). Reading in
this sense is a search for reflection, community, or similitude, a link
between past and present. When identification is possible, however, it
can be shattering. In "The Torment of Queer Literature," Kelly Caldwell
explains the quandry of reading James Baldwin's *Giovanni's Room* as a
transgender woman: "what if the only available act of identification is
one of stigma and shame? Embracing queerness is often embracing
abjection. Sometimes identification is loss and despair" (par. 4).
Identification tends to center around these "bad feelings" which offer
less fodder for political resistence. However, identification with more
positive aspects of queer experience is hardly an alternative. For many
readers, the more redemptive or celebratory narratives offer no
consolation. The reader is stuck between recognizing their own pain or
feeling guilty for not recognizing pleasure: "Either read a book like
*Giovanni’s Room* at the risk of recognizing David’s denial and
repression as my own, or read a book that celebrates queer lives and sex
boldly and end up despising my own cowardice" (par. 17).

### queerness is a failed project, which is why it's so tempting.

The more hopeless and resistant queer subjects make for more tempting
identifications. Love explains how these subjects remain beyond the
reader's grasp: "As queer readers we tend to see ourselves as reaching
back toward isolated figures in the queer past in order to rescue or
save them. It is hard to know what to do with texts that resist our
advances" (8). The reason that these subjects remain so unreachable has
to do with the nature of queerness itself, which represents absence,
loss, and failure. Love illustrates this quality by evoking a Greek
myth, Orpheus and Eurydice, in which the lover botches his beloved's
rescue by looking back at her as they exit the underworld. Love quotes
from Maurice Blanchot's account of the story in "The Gaze of Orpheus,"
to describe what Orpheus searches for in the prohibited and doomed
glance backward:

> Not to look would be infidelity to the measureless, imprudent force of
> his movement, which does not want Eurydice in her daytime truth and in
> her everyday appeal, but wants her in her nocturnal obscurity, in her
> distance, with her closed body and sealed face---wants to see her not
> when she is visible, but when she is invisible, and not as the
> intimacy of familiar life, but as the foreignness of what excludes all
> intimacy, and wants, not to make her live, but to have living in her
> the plenditude of death. 50

Orpheus's downfall is his desire for a glimpse at what cannot be
grapsed, at what remains beyond the light. This desire is not for
"daytime truth" but for "noctural obscurity," which is always receding
at the moment of pursuit. Like Eurydice, queerness emerges only to slip
away, turning its face from the parched gaze. Can we be blamed for
looking for that which cannot be grasped? No, because queerness has
always been structured by that which is not, by what Love calls
"impossible love" (24). Not only is queerness projected to fail, it is a
project of failure. Love reminds us that "Queer history has been an
education in absence" (50). In learning failure and loss, queer readers
can only identify with what they have been taught to recognize as
untouchable. Full identification, like Eurydice in the daylight, is
prevented by design.

### identifying, but not fully.

Love proposes a method in which the goal is not to redeem queer subjects
or resolve queer failure. Rather, the problem of identification is
turned to a reading strategy: "I want to suggest a mode of
historiography that recognizes the inevitability of a 'play of
recogniztions,' but that also sees these recognitions not as consoling
but as shattering" (45). Reading, for Love, can enact a "play of
recognitions," which is a way of making fleeting connections that do not
presume complete understanding. It is a way of identifying, but not
fully. Full identification would attempt to wrench the subject from its
suffering, and effectively transform it into something else. Rather that
attempt to rescusitate it, Love looks to the ways that identity
unsettles and dissolves subjectivity. She gives the example of Stephen
Gordon from Radclyffe Hall's *The Well of Loneliness*. Once considered
too depressing as a model of lesbianism, recent critics have cast
Stephen Gordon as a transgender figure. Love resists this label,
maintaining that Stephen is “beyond the reach of such redemptive
narratives” (119). The question, for Love, is not whether Stephen is a
pre-op FTM (Female-to-Male), but how Stephen’s existential negativity
can be read as an embodied phenonmenon, as “a social experience
insistently internalized and corporeal” (108).

### ofelia schutte and the incommensurable

The archivist must work within the discrepancy between reality and the
historical record. Hartman's goal is "to expose and exploit the
incommensurability between the experience of the enslaved and the
fictions of history... the requirements of narrative, the stuff of
subjects and plots and ends" (10).

### Critique of affirmation: Cvetkovitch

Attempts to affirm negative queer experience can be harmful. Ann
Cvetkovitch's work on trauma studies provides an example of how this
tendency can create further misunderstanding about suffering. In her
book, *Archive of Feelings*, Cvetkovitch explores expressions of trauma
within the public sphere. She asks how individuals might reclaim some of
the most negative and traumatic feelings into something positive and
theraputic: "I want to place moments of extreme trauma alongside moments
of everyday emotional distress that are often the only sign that
trauma's effects are still being felt” (3). She wrests trauma studies
out of medical discourse and into public culture---turning something
that is traditionally private and pathologized into something
communitarian, an open, everyday "archive of feelings."

Importantly, Cvetkovitch marshalls this reconfiguration of trauma to
expand what we consider the 'archive'. She also makes some incisive
points about the inability to fully portray suffering: "Because trauma
can be unspeakable and unrepresentable and because it is marked by
forgetting and dissociation, it often seems to leave behind no records
at all" (7). Cvetkovitch explores alternative methods of figuring
trauma, which are transformed when they enter the public sphere. She
cites examples from public performances like rock shows or
documentaries, in which the artists enact "moments of intense affect
that are transformative or revealing” (26).

Although her focus on the affective and ephemeral dimension of
performance opens up conceptions of the archive, Cvetkovitch perhaps
goes too far when she suggests that these performances are redemptive or
in some way compensate for traumatic experience. She indicates that such
performances go so far as to alleviate psychological damage and
suffering: “Imaginative work that may bear an oblique relation to the
actual event of sexual abuse can ultimately be more ‘healing’ than an
explicit rendering of the event” (94). Trauma is a real medical
condition, with real consequences (death) for those who do not seek
treatment or downplay its life-threatening effects. Critics should be
careful in extending a definition of trauma that will end up hurting
those who are affected by it. We do not need to move trauma strictly
from the medical discourse in order to have a more communitarian, open,
and public relationship to it. There are other ways to confront stigma
which doesn’t attempt to redeem it, as Love explores with her notion of
“Feeling Backward.”

The step that Cvetkovitch takes with regard to trauma is interesting,
however, for what it suggests about the role of the critic in analysis.
The point isn't to find evidence of overcoming queer suffering, but to
examine the ways that queerness is figured in abstraction. What does
queerness look like, what can it do?

abstraction, formalization, opacity: Queer
------------------------------------------

### reparative reading is active

We might explore, with Sedgwick, "forms of thought that would not be
structured by the question of prohibition" (11). Sedgwick points that
that critical inquiry might work within a *reparative* methodology,
which opens room for interpretive possibilities and attention to
positive affects like love, gratitude, and affection. This method
welcomes surprise of discovery over affirmation. It prioritizes "local
theories and nonce taxonomies" over totalizing perspectives (145). We
might approach criticism as having to do with *movement* rather than
*knowledge*:

> \[M\]oving from the rather fixated question Is a particular piece of
> knowledge true, and how can we know? to further questions: What does
> knowledge *do*---the pursuit of it, the having and exposing of it, the
> receiving again of knowledge of what one already knows? How, in short,
> is knowledge *performative*, and how best does one move among its
> causes and effects?" (my italics, 124)

This reorienation of knowledge as *active*, as performative, opens up
the critical process to one that is mobile and and speculative rather
than suspicious. Moreover, it draws attention to the ways that knowledge
is embodied, with all the surprises and discoveries that embodiment
entails.

### Scott's evidence of experience:

Scott, Joan. “The Evidence of Experience”:

-   Using experience for evidence rather than thinking about how
    experience is shaped. Scott talks about representation, about
    looking at experience, at the vision, the optical effects, for what
    they suggest. The beautiful reading of Samuel Delany’s vision of the
    “millions of gay men” the fantastical projection (rather than real
    identity) that suggests a political consciousness. Historiography is
    about modes of seeing.
-   Scott’s proposed project is difficult to carry out. How many times
    do we need to go back to the archive? To what extent can you
    constantly start again at origins (genealogy).
-   She’s right in the critique that there’s no universal class
    consciousness.
-   Experience is always mediated for literary critics. We never take a
    text as referential---there is rhetoric and form.

### Munoz's queerness as emergent

The not-yet-here ness of queerness.

### hartman, lowe, arondekar on recuperating absence

"The critical challenge is to imagine a practice of archival reading
that incites relationships between the seductions of recovery and the
occlusions such retrieval mandates. By this I mean to say: What if the
recuperative gesture return us to a space of absence? How then does one
restore absence to itself? Put simply, can an empty archive also be
full?" (1).

Hartmen's "critical fabulation"

The archivist must work within the discrepancy between reality and the
historical record. Hartman's goal is "to expose and exploit the
incommensurability between the experience of the enslaved and the
fictions of history... the requirements of narrative, the stuff of
subjects and plots and ends" ("Venus" 10).

-   "This double gesture can be described as straining against the
    limits of the archive to write a cultural history of the captive,
    and, at the same time, enacting the impossibility of representing
    the lives of the captives precisely through the process of
    narration" ("Venus" 11).

### QOC critique and aesthetics

Amber Musser's surface aesthetics

### Toward a Queer Form

Writing the self is connected to form. Always. The form is multiple. The
form makes subjectivity opaque, but in the act of abstraction, making it
opaque, we can touch it and play around with it.

Opacity as value (Amin, Musser)

“For our purposes, queer form means challenging the primacy of the
visual, which has too often been a site for pernicious power relations…
At their base, such operations of surveillance and classification rely
on the concept of immutable difference, on sharp boundaries, and on the
possibility of exhaustively knowing the other…. We see queer form as an
aesthetics that moves persistently around the visual, thereby avoiding
this flattening. To the extent that form operates behind the scenes as
ideological impulse and materiality, queer formal practices can resist
the dictates of transparency normally required of non-normative subjects
by illuminating the unseen. In this way it not only troubles the
epistemic assurances of the visual regime, but it also asks how shifting
away from static visuality can circumnavigate questions of
objectification. A move toward the diffusely sensual, and away from the
linearity of visual gazing, articulates difference in terms that are not
about dominance or norms, but that underscore the importance of thinking
with other modes of knowing, theorizing, and experiencing. Queer form is
about other ways of understanding relationships to power and
relationships to being” (Amin, Musser, Perez 232-3)

Form understood as associated with queerness, queer experience, and as a
way to disrupt easy understanding. Form can be queer and queer form can
be opaque: “Form informs queerness, and queerness is best understood as
a series of relations to form, relations not limited to binary and
adversarial models of resistance and opposition” (228). “Queer form”
emerges… as a name for the range of formal, aesthetic, and sensuous
strategies that make difference a little less knowable, visible, and
digestible. This special issue makes a case for the value of
indirection, opacity, and withholding as queer strategies for
minoritarian art producers” (235). “form focuses attention on how
violence—homophobia, racism, gentrification, capitalism, and
colonialism, for instance—has structured conditions of possibility in
material and epistemological ways” (232). touch as an intersection for
queerness and DH, both highly sensual in that they abstract from the
source

in DH: data is cooked
---------------------

As a mode of relationality, "Feeling Backward" not presume a full
connection between the critic and subject, keeping the subject at arms
length. It approaches queerness as something receding, even when the
critic is perpetually in pursuit. This relationship between critic and
textual subject evokes some of the attitudes that digital humaninists
take toward their data. In some queer theory and digital humanities runs
a similar hesistation not to overdetermine or overinterpret the content
of what we read. Critics such as Johanna Drucker and Ted Underwood are
careful to qualify the nature of data as constructed, wrenched from the
reality of lived experience, and necessarily reduced to fit whatever
environs required by analysis. Even if they are careful about
approaching data as constructed, however, they take vastly different
routes in handling the results of their analysis.

### Drucker's skewing the graphs

Johanna Drucker argues that quantification techniques (such as
visualizations in graphs and charts) actually misrepresent the data they
are meant to convey. Drucker explains that, in order to place this data
on a graph or chart, it undergoes a transformation. Complexity is
reduced to whatever quality the visualization apparently requires. To
illustrate this reduction, Drucker presents a chart displaying the
amount of books published over several years. The chart appears to
convey production during this specific time period[^5], but Drucker
explains that publication date is an arbitrary metric for capturing
production. She brings to the surface all the assumptions made in such a
metric, for example, the limitations of "novel" as a genre and the
connotations behind "published," which suggests date of appearance, but
has no indication of composition, editing, review, distribution. Drucker
reminds us that each piece of data carries with it the result of many
interpretive decisions, which carry with them varying degrees of
opacity. These interpretations ("reductions") are necessary in order to
present complex concepts like book production as a bar on a chart.
Drucker explains: "the graphical presentation of supposedly self-evident
information (again, formulated in this example as “the number of novels
published in a year”) conceals these complexities, and the
interpretative factors that bring the numerics into being, under a guise
of graphical legibility" (Drucker par. 23).

To resist the reductions of "data," a term that connotes that which is
"given," Drucker proposes "capta," to suggest the act of being taken and
transformed. Drucker's "capta" is deliberately creative, turning
graphical expressions into expressive metrics: components used for
measurement, like lines or bars on a graph, break or are fuzzy and
permeable. Objects are not discrete entities, but interact with the
other objects in the visualization. For example, in a bar graph of book
publications/year, she warps the bars on the graph, making some of them
fuzzy, wider, shorter, in an attempt to show that publication as a
metric elides other information such as composition, editing,
purchasing, etc.

This activity is a way of figuring elements that have been reduced,
resolved, or ignored in traditional quantitative analysis. It evokes
what Love says about queer subjectivity and experience being beyond the
reaches of the critic. Drucker makes evident what is overlooked or
assumed when dealing with complex subjects. She places those elements
there, for all to see, in a way that muddles (rather than
simplifies[^6]) the relationship between them. She does try to figure
these elements, but not in a way that attempts to clarify or resolve
their complexity. Rather, like Love, she works on the “image of exile,
of refusal, even of failure” (Love 71).

### Ted Underwood's models as object of study

Ted Underwood and other literary critics doing Computational Literary
Studies (CLS) approach their data with vastly different commitments.
Underwood harnesses computational power and sophistication to glimpse
the big picture of literary history, what he calls the "distant horizon"
of literary trends across centuries. His argument convincingly begins
with the observation that human capacities---sight, attention, and
memory---preclude them from grasping the larger patterns of literary
history over time periods. Distant reading, whereby "distance" implies
abstraction, or the simplification of textual data into computable
objects such as publication dates and genres, allows critics to make
connections in apparent chaos, to draw a steady line of historical
development through the swarm of overflowing information. According to
Underwood, distant reading opens new scopes to literary analysis, which
would otherwise be invisible to readers: "a single pair of eyes at
ground level can't grasp the curve of the horizon" (x).

Though to a much lesser degree than Drucker, Underwood similarly turns
his computational method into an object of study. His research deploys
machine learning, that is, computer programs "trained" by certain data
sets to make predictions about other datasets. Underwood studies how
"models," or calculations based on multiple variables, created by sample
data can then be used to measure further data. One of his models
measures the probability that computers can guess the sex of a fictional
character based on the words associated with that character. Underwood
explains how the test is configured:

> We represent each character by the adjectives that modify them, verbs
> they govern and so on---excluding only words that explicitly name a
> gendered role like *boyhood* or *wife*. Then, we present characters,
> labeled with grammatical gender, to a learning algorithm. The
> algorithm will learn what it means to be 'masculine' or 'feminine'
> purely by observing what men and women actually do in stories. The
> model produced by the algorithm can make predictions about other
> characters, previously unseen. 115

The computer takes in information about some (the more the better) books
and studies that information in order to make predictions about other
books. The resulting model, therefore, is always guided by its previous
experience. Underwood rightly points out that such calculations cannot
be taken as fact. Like humans, "machine learning tends to absorb
assumptions latent in the evidence it is trained on" (xv). To Underwood,
machine learning is no more "objective" than regualar analysis. This is
why Underwood calls his work "perspectival modeling," where he studies
how datasets reveal, not the truth of literary histroy, but the
*approaches* of those who study it: "By training models on evidence
selected by different people, we can crystallize different social
perspectives and compare them rigorously to each other" (xv).

The results of the analysis is baked into the process, something that
Underwood understands and accepts as part of the obstacles toward his
distant horizon. In looking at the way gender is characterized, or
rather how perspectival models characterize gender, in novels from the
18th century to the 21st, he finds that the results reproduce some of
the structuring assumptions from the outset. His examination of gender
characterization finds that "while gender roles were becoming more
flexible, the attention actually devoted to women was declining" (114).
The analysis points to a steady overapping of words used to describe men
and women over time, shown as a convergence on the graph between words
previously associated with women, such as "heart," which begin to
intersect with words typically assoicated with men, like "passion,"
toward the middle of the 20th century. However, while the categories of
"masculine" and "feminine" words are progressively blurred over time,
the actual number of female *characters* declines. Underwood explains
this drop could be due to several reasons, one of which is the simple
fact that the practice of writing "gentrified" through the 20th century,
when writing became acknowledged and pursued as a male occupation (137).
His analysis shows that men tend to write more about men, while women
write equally about men and women. With less women writing, the amount
of female characters therefore declines. This explains how Underwood's
seemingly paradoxical conclusion, that gender roles become more flexible
while the actual prevalence of women dissapates from fiction, might be
possible. But Underwood also admits that another factor---the assumption
of gender as a binary category---might very well be guiding his results:
"One possible conclusion would be that the structural positions of
masculine and feminine identity, vis-'a-vis each other, have remained
very stable---while the actual content of masculinity and femninity has
been entirely mutable" (140). Viewing gender as a binary construction
perpetuates the structural categories of male/female in a way that is at
odds with the actual content of such categorie. In other words, if
gender is binary, then it stands to reason that the relation between
male and female will be one of opposition. Underwood proposes that one
way around this confining structure of binary gender would be to
refigure gender "as a spectrum or as a *multiplication* of gender
identities that made the binary opposition between masculine and
feminine increasingly irrelevant to characters' plural roles" (140).

Critique of reproducibility
---------------------------

The criterion of reproducibility is deployed as a benchmark for
reviewing and assessing the efficacy of digital quantitative methods.
Despite their vastly different committments and methods, scholars like
Underwood can be compared to Nan Z. Da, Sari Altschuler and David Weimer
for the ways they place value on reproducibility.

### nan Z da on reproducibility

In a controversial peice about text analysis, Nan Z. Da critiques
Computational Literary Studies (CLS) for its irrelevance to literary
criticism. Da explains that results from quantification do one of two
things: they either affirm what is already obvious or they present
conclusions that are inaccurate. Of her many gripes with quantitative
methods, which include "technical problems, logical fallacies, and
conceptual flaws," her central concern is the fundamental "mismatch" of
scientific methods to humanistic inquiry, both of which have opposing
"natures" (601). Meant for reading in abundance, tradign "speed for
accuracy, and coverage for nuance," Quantitativ methods are
inappropriately applied to literary interpretation (620). According to
Da, "we must use them in accordance with their true functions” (620).

One point in Da's essay crystallizes her ultimately conservative
investment that aligns her with theorists who have vastly different
methods and perspectives. Here she establishes the criterion of
reproducibility, which suggests an objective at odds with humanistic
endeavor. To verify the results of a Topic Modelling experiment, Da
attempts to replicate the model on her own machine. Because the
reproduction fails, she denigrates the whole process: "if the method
were effective, someone with comparable training should be able to use
the same parameters to get basically the same results" (628-629).
However, "topic modeling is like a kaleidoscope that turns out something
entirely different with the slightest tweaking” (629). Her emphasis on
the “reproducible” in CLS extends one of distant reading early
champion's originating call for a “falsifiable criticism”: both advocate
for a methodology that is as reliable and verifiable as the social
sciences[^7]. The interesting detail in her critique is the insinuation
in *reproducible* that somehow analysis is something that can exist
outside of human performance/activity/error.

The reproducible indicates a slippery slope. By characterizing literary
criticism as something that can be verified, that can be copied and
reproduced ad infinitum, it assumes that interpretive conditions can be
universalized, that subjects bring with them the same experiences and
investments. Moreover, it suggests that there is a *correct* answer to
literary critical questions, as if literature is a problem that needs to
be solved.

### Altschuler and Weimar

This notion extends to digital humanist practitioners.

they call to overturn the "unproblematic translatability of information
between the senses" while maintaining that reproduction is the highest
value. They argue to "texture the humanities", pointing out that much of
DH prioritizes the visual over other senses -- "privilege sight as the
sense through which knowledge is accessible" (74). Rightly so, they
argue, “The textured DH we call for here acknowledges that we cannot
study knowledge only abstractly, apart from the senses, and that we
cannot study literature, art, and history without including the history
of embodied experiences” (74-75).

-   “Touch This Page! uses 3-D printed facsimiles of raised-letter text
    to inspire reflection on the assumptions most people make about
    which senses are involved in reading” (82).

But they stray too far when they place reproduction over
remediation/deformance. They state their aims: “to expand the sensory
accessibility of archives for all users and to do so through the digital
reproduction---rather than the translation---of tactile knowledge” (76).
Case example of the perfect reproduction:

-   A scenario where “users... can download a visual copy with

descriptive data, engage with the text in virtual reality, and create
their own textured facsimile. This technology once more makes possible
the tactile reading experiences for which this volume was designed and
promises library patrons a richer engagement with touch than most
archives can currently provide---even in person (85-86).

The use case scenario makes the assumption that a reproduction is the
ideal form of textuality, despite their asserted aims for "diversity of
embodied experiences":

-   “we must avoid tilting after the fiction of some ideal digital
    surrogate---like a virtual reality system that would flawlessly
    mimic original objects---lest we become digital Pierre Menards,
    expending extensive energy to improve our reproductions to discover,
    at last, that only the original perfects represents itself… Instead,
    we envision in our tactile futures multiple strategies that could
    not only open up access to varied experiences---past and
    present---but also diversity the ways embodied experiences structure
    our digital worlds” (86).
-   in order to open up “multiple strategies” and diversity embodied
    experiences, we need a theory of text that is capacious enough to
    accept variation and transmediation.
-   This argument overlooks deformance is a

solution: the ways that creating new texts, paratexts, creates new
objects of knowledge. It overlooks the performative, ala McGann,
Clement.

In this view, digital becomes a means of optimization, efficiency, total
knowledge and understanding.

For alternative readings: queer theory
--------------------------------------

### Felski's post critical reading: the illusion of emotional detachment

The reality is that we are stuck in these bodies of our thinking. Rita
Felski describes how seemingly neutral and detatched critical stance
belies an emotional disposition:

> Scholars like to think that their claims stand or fall on the merits
> of their reasoning and the irresistible weight of their evidence, yet
> they also adopt a low-key affective tone that can bolster or
> drastically diminish their allure. Critical detachment, in this light,
> is not an absence of mood but one manifestation of it---a certain
> orientation toward one's subject, a way of making one's argument
> matter. 6

The "low-key affective tone" of scholarly discourse suggests that
affect, and the feeling subject associated with it, has been left out of
the critical process. However, appealing to the apparently unemotional
does not succeed in removing emotion from argument---this is
impossible---but it does reinforce the illusion that emotions don't
belong in rational thought. Actually they do---though the emotions of
critical discourse are of a quality and degree that mask their own
presence. Felski explains that, “Rather than an ascetic exercise in
demystification, suspicious reading turns out to be a style of thought
infused with a range of passions and pleasures, intense engagements and
eager commitments” (9). One follows the exposition of the framing
paradigms, the twists and turns of the driving question, the climax of
of discovery followed by the of denouement of the conclusion, one
immediately senses the full dramatic repertoire of critical inquiry.

And the illusion of reason as being devoid of emotion is not limited to
verbal discourse. It also pervades--perhaps even more insidiously---the
apparently objective reprsentations data visualization. Graphs, charts,
and maps all contain persuasive elements that succeed through their
invisibility, in the trust, for example, that the souces are truthfully
represented in the visualization or the implied preference of some
metrics over others. Lauren Klein and Catherine D'Ignazio point out that
"so-called 'neutral' visualizations that do not appear to have an
editorial hand... might even be the most perniciously persuasive
visualizations of all!" (*Data Feminism*, chapter 2). Not dots on a
graph can be said to be removed from the predelictions of the creator
and the generosity of the viewer.

### Felski & Sedgwick affective approaches

Critics like Rita Felski and Eve Sedgwick adopt an alternative approach
toward reading that exposes knowledge as derived from embodied
experience. Felski talks about reading as an affective orientation,
where readers position themselves and their desires around texts. Felski
critiques the popular orientation in literary criticism centered on what
Paul Riceour has called the “hermeneutics of suspicion”---the desire to
unmask and demystify the secrets of literary works. According to Felski,
critics generally behave as if language is always withholding some
truth, that the critic’s task is to reveal the unsaid or repressed. She
identifies the affective modes of suspicion to include disenchantment,
vigilance, paranoia.

Sedgwick makes a similar assertion about tendencies of "paranoid
reading," though she bases her critique on Michele Foucault's repressive
hypothesis from his *History of Sexuality, Vol. 1*, which approaches
discussions on sex and sexuality through the lense of repression or
prohibition. Rather than excavating the workings of the repressive
hypothesis, Foucault is interested in the ways that discourse on sex has
proliferated, in its multiplications that avoid censure while satisfying
the desire for sexual discourse. Left with no place to go, discussion on
sex simply continued to spread by transforming itself into palatable
discourses such as Marxism, pyschoanalytic, libertarian, etc. By looking
for the specter of sex/power dynamics in these discourses, Foucault
seems to work outside the logic of the repressive hypothesis. But this
is not the case. Sedgwick explains that, "the almost delirious promise
of the book" is "the suggestion that there might be ways of thinking
around \[the repressive hypothesis\]" (9). In fact, Sedgwick explains
that Foucault's inquiry has been, from the start, structured by
repression and prohibition. She finds that the "critical analysis of
repression is itself inseparable from repression" (10).

Felski and Sedgwick see a dead end in militant reading practices.

Felski's nightmare: Sedgwick's wish:

"How do we step outside the repressive hypothesis "to forms of thought
that would not be structured by the question of prohibition in the first
place?" (*Touching Feeling* 11).

Speaking on Foucault's repressive hypothesis: "I knew what I wanted from
it: some ways of understanding human desire that might be quite to the
side of prohibition and repression, that might hence be structured quite
differently from the heroic, 'liberatory', inescapably dualistic
righteousness of hunting down and attacking prohibition/repression in
all its chameleonic guises" (*Touching Feeling* 10).

Felski shows how this suspicion toward texts forecloses other possible
readings while providing no guarantee of rigorous or radical thought.
Rather than adopt a suspicious attitude, Felski suggests that literary
scholars try “postcritical reading," which looks to what the text
suggests or makes possible. Felski wonders what if we allowed ourselves
to be marked or struck by what we read. Then, rather than just be a
cognitive activity, reading can become an “embodied mode of
attentiveness that involves us in acts of sensing, perceiving, feeling,
registering, and engaging” (176).

Reading is about movement

Postcritical Reading --- "Reading, in this light, is a matter of
attaching, collating, negotiating, assembling—of forging links between
things that were previously unconnected”… “Reading, in this sense, is
not just a cognitive activity but an embodied mode of attentiveness that
involves us in acts of sensing, perceiving, feeling, registering, and
engaging” (176).

### Sedgwick on generative shame

What if we read Henry James mobilizing shame as a creative resource? For
many queer people, shame is a structuring force in their identity. But
this doesn’t mean we need to be negative, we can look to the ways that
shame unlocks creativity and productivity---to the ways that metaphors
are made possible through shame. James’ “blushing”, “flushing” is linked
to a fantasy of the skin being entered, or touched by a hand. GLOVE,
GAGE, GAGEURE… We can reclaim a negative affect of shame and approach it
as a generative force.

-   "Shame interests me politically, then, because it generates and
    legitimates the place of identity--the question of identity--at the
    origin of the impulse to the performative, but does so without
    giving that identity space the standing of an essence. It
    constitutes the as-to-be-constituted, which is also to say, as
    already there for the (necessary, productive) misconstrual and
    misrecognition. Shame--living, as it does, on and in the face--seems
    to be uniquely contagious from one person to another. And the
    contagiousness of shame is only facilitated by its anamorphic,
    protean susceptibility to new expressive grammars" (63).

Paralleling Queer & DHers looking for alternative readings
----------------------------------------------------------

### Case in point: klein's figuring the absence

Draw Klein and Hartman together---this is what I want to do for Queer
texts.

Performativity
--------------

Digital formats and interfaces facilitate queer encounters methods, an
intimate process of engaging with literature on a computer, where users
can manipulate and transform text.

### Bode's materiality, critque of Underwood

Katherine Bode's critique of Underwood points out that QLS methods
incorporate hidden assumptions about the data, about what is findable.
She offers a method that builds off the humanistic approaches in textual
scholarship and bibliography, where the model is prior to computation.

### Tanya Clement: discovery

### Against reproduction, for remediation/deformance

### McGann's "prosthetic extension"

These tools work alongside the reader’s intuition, in what Jerome McGann
calls a “prosthetic extension of that demand for critical reflection,”
by which the reader is able to feel her way through the text (18).

### Critique of Underwood's "sensitivity"

Underwood overlooks the ways that distant reading can be a prosthesis.
Claims that Quantitative are not as "sensitive" or "exacting" as close
reading, and are mostly useful for long views. How can we approach
distant reading as multiplying alternative readings? Rightly points out
that human attention guides the scale of analysis. So we have to be very
careful at the question we are posing, and the way that we interact with
the computer.

-   "Critics who want to sensitively describe the merits of a single
    work usually have no need for statistics... Computational analysis
    of a text is more flexible than it used to be, but it is still quite
    crude compared to human reading; it helps mainly with questions
    where evidence is simple too big to fit in a single reader's memory"
    (xxi).

<!-- -->

-   Repeatedly stresses that the point of quantitative methods is to
    discover new scales of analysis, but he seems to be looking for an
    overarching theory that will encapsulate literary history.
    Quantitative methods seek to overcome a problem of attention, of
    memory, in order to gain a large view. Here, human memory is a
    hindrance, rather than a drive. The goal is rather to multiply
    alternative readings.
    -   Attention determines analysis, analysis determines knowledge,
        knowledge determines disciplines, periodization (8).
    -   "The challenge is to find a perspective that makes the
        descriptions preferred by eighteenth-, nineteenth-, and
        twentieth-century scholars all congruent with each other" (32).

Vantanges
---------

### Klein, Mandell, Caughie, Gaboury

### Against totalization

### The visible and the invisible, opting out

Provisionality
--------------

### Susan Brown's provisionality

### Julia Flander's work on Orlando

### Against stability

Digital projects based on text manipulation:
--------------------------------------------

I find that the haptic and exploratory activity of working with these
tools enlivens the reading process by allowing the reader to play,
experiment, and imagine new connections to the textual object.

### *Voyant-Tools*

Jerome McGann "prosthetic extensions" Potential texts: Woolf's
*Orlando*.

-   Interweave a narrative about touch. Taking new materialist ideas but

placing them within context of QPOC critiqe. Anzaldua and Bennet on
touch and severing. Sarah Ahmed too.

### *These Waves of Girls*

Following narrative desire. The click of the mouse allows readers to
move with the text, based on their own paths.

### what are some print texts that enact these principles of movement?

-   Alison Bechdel's "Are You My Mother": where every page is vibrating

with reference.

MISC
----

### Defining queer, Amin on historicizing through affect

queerness manifests as an affective relation between the subject and
desired object. Kadji Amin defines queer as "fundamentally affective...
a matter of sensing a resonance between one's object of study and the
inchoate cluster of feelings that inhabit and animate the term queer"
(173).

### Reading touching: within our bodies

This point bears repeating---we are always stuck within the bodies of
our thinking. As such, we might as well turn to ourselves, to explore
(rather than how things are in the world) how things are *to us*.
Sedgwick points out that the problem is not one of knowledge, but one of
movement. We can try to in-/corporate/, as much as possible, alternative
reading methods that get at the unique experience of being a
thinking/feeling human that is fiddling with these tools. We can, in
other words, examine the possibilities of *touching* what we read. And
we can do so with digital tools for text analysis and machine learning.
However, there still exists a view that distant reading lacks the
sensitivity of close reading. "Critics who want to sensitively describe
the merits of a single work usually have no need for statistics" (xxi).

### data reduction / queer assimilation

For those that would argue that negative feelings are no longer relevant
in today's world, Heather Love responds that the advent of assimilation,
of popular acceptance, only creates more problems for a group that has
come into being as abject. *(the corrolary for digital studies is the
proliferation of data, of information, digitization)* Queer assimilation
and apparent rise in acceptance across popular culture and mass media
contradicts the reality of shame and stigma that everyday queers
experience, a contradiction that breeds ever more shame: "Of course,
same-sex desire is not as impossible as it used to be; as a result, the
survival of feelings such as shame, isolation, and self-hatred into the
post-Stonewall era is often the occasion for further feelings of shame.
The embarrassment of owning such feelings, out of place as they are in a
movement that takes pride as its watchword, is acute" (4). What do we do
with these residual feelings of shame?

How should queer criticism orient itself? Love shows that critics face a
contradiction, brought on by the reality of negative feelings and
psychic costs of being queer in a homophobic society. The narrative
trajectory of queer progress runs counter to the residual pain of being
queer. Criticism is stuck in the middle of this ambivalence, between
affirming its pride and bemoaning its suffering: "We are not sure if we
should explore the link between homosexuality and loss, or set about
proving that it does not exist" (Love 3).

### Misc Quotes

"how might activating emotion – leveraging it, rather than resisting
emotion in data visualization – help us learn, remember, and communicate
with data?" (Klein and D'Ignazio, *Data Feminism*, chapter 2)

Works Cited
===========

Caldwell, Kelly. "The Torment of Queer Literature," *The Rumpus*. 2018.
Love, Heather. *Feeling Backward: Loss and the Politics of Queer
History*. 2009.

Pope, James. "Where do we Go from Here? Reader’s Responses to Hypertext
Fiction: Narrative Structures, Reading Pleasure and the Impact of
Interface Design." Convergence 16.1 (2010): 75-94. Print.

Wallis, Brian. “Black Bodies, White Science: Louis Agassiz's Slave
Daguerreotypes.” *American Art*, vol. 9, no. 2, 1995, pp. 39–61. JSTOR,
www.jstor.org/stable/3109184.

commands
========

c-c c-x f =&gt; create a new footnote c-u c-c c-x f then select s =&gt;
renumber footnotes

block quotes: \#+BEGIN~QUOTE~ & \#+END~QUOTE~

Footnotes
=========

[^1]: Digital computation runs on data in the form of these numerical
    digits, even though computer language, at the most rudimentary
    level, is based on a binary counting system, on ones and zeroes.
    (quote or citation to Code: the hidden language of computer hardware
    and software)

[^2]: Schutte, Ofelia. “Cultural Alterity: Cross-Cultural Communication
    and Feminist Theory in North-South Contexts.” Hypatia, vol. 13, no.
    2, 1998, pp. 53–72. www.jstor.org/stable/3810637.

[^3]: Amin, Kadji, Amber Jamilla Musser, and Roy Pérez “Queer Form:
    Aesthetics, Race, and the Violences of the Social” ASAP/Journal,
    Volume 2, Number 2, May 2017, pp. 227-239: “Form informs queerness,
    and queerness is best understood as a series of relations to form,
    relations not limited to binary and adversarial models of resistance
    and opposition” (228).

[^4]: Rita Felski? and Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick.

[^5]: Drucker implicitly refers to the first chapter from Franco
    Moretti's *Graphs, Maps, Trees* (2007), throughout which Moretti
    graphs novels by their publication date between 1700 and 2000 and
    draws conclusions about the relationship between genre and
    generations of readers.

[^6]: Moretti: "'Distant reading'... where distance is however not an
    obstacle but /a specific form of knowledge" (1).

[^7]: According to Franco Moretti: “Testing” literary interpretations be
    the same process as in scientific disciplines -- demanding that
    interpretations are “coherent, univocal, and complete,” and are
    tested against “data” that appears to contradict it (*Signs* 21).
    “The day criticism gives up its battle cry ‘it is possible to
    interpret this element in the following way,’ to replace it with the
    much more prosaic, ‘the following interpretation is impossible for
    such and such a reason,’ it will have taken a huge step forward on
    the road of methodological solidity” (*Signs* 22).
