** II: the problem: queerness as untouchable 
*** toward a reading method of the untouchable 
The idea of the "untouchable" builds off queer theorists who have
isolated a queer experience of displacement, estrangement, or a
feeling of a lack that creates a space for emergent affects. This
experience derives from the political and social environment that
attempts to erase the existence of minorty subjects, particularly
queer people of color. Even as LGBT groups appear to gain more
visibily and acceptance, such gains are trapped within the limiting,
normative time of the present. [expand and cite this section,
potentially to Bostock v. Clayton County]

This chapter will unpack this condition of queerness being
"untouchable" with regard to literary analysis. By "untouchable," I
mean that queer subjects cannot be accessed or known in the same way
that majority subjects are within dominant culture. This condition of
queerness being 'untouchable' influences our approach as readers and
critics toward queer texts, themes, and subjects. Identities within
texts are not stable across time and place, and as readers, we tend to
make acts of identification that collapse or overlook the complexity
of experience. For queer readers in particular, identification can
emerge from a desire to recognize within the past something that
affirms queer experience in the present. Heather Love describes queer
critics, "Like demanding lovers [who] promise to rescue the past when
in fact they dream of being rescued themselves" (33). This chapter
explores potential positions or orientations around queerness. To this
end, it proposes a reading method that enables queerness to be
grasped, but at a distance.

Muñoz reminds us that "The fiction of identity is one that is accessed
with relative ease by most majoritarian subjects"
(/Disidentifications/ 5).

*** disidentification points to incommensurability
This chapter draws the condition of "untouchability" from a theory of
identity developed by Queer Theorists from mostly Latinx backgrounds
and traditions, particularly Muñoz, Gloria Anzaldúa, and Ofelia
Schutte. The work of these theorists, which itself draws from the
thinking of Chela Sandoval, Norma Alarcón and Audre Lorde, all radical
feminists of color, coalesces around a paradigm of identity formation
that Muñoz generalizes as "identities-in-difference"
(/Disidentifications/ 6). Muñoz's identities-in-difference marshalls
theories of difference that center moments of failed interpellation,
misfitting, and unbelonging as the core materials of identity
formation. This paradigm of identity formation sets up our
understanding of how affect provides the ground to remagine reading as
situated within the reader's embodied relationship to the text.

Due to the effects of what Muñoz calls the "cultural logics of
heteronormativity, white supremacy, and misogyny," queer people of
color have been placed outside majority ideas about race, sexuality,
gender, and class, that constitute dominant society
(/Disidentifications/ 5). As a result, minority experience is defined
by a gap in identification, where the minority subject emerges in the
failure to adhere to social expectations. Within this gap, dominant
signfications of identity do not remain totally inaccessible to
minority subjects. Rather, they are accessed according to a process of
"disidentification," where subjects find alternative pathways of
connection to that which remains beyond their grasp. These moments can
be fleeting sensations of finding oneself attracted to something that
is inappropriate, "to read onesself and one's own life narrative in a
moment, object, or subject that is not culturally coded to 'connect'
with the disidentifying subject" (/Disidentifications/ 12). Muñoz
offers his own formative experience of disidentification from a
childhood memory of watching Truman Capote on TV:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
I remember, for instance, seeing an amazingly queeny Truman Capote
describe the work of fellow writer Jack Kerouac as not writing but,
instead, typing. I am certain that my pre-out consciousness was
completely terrified by the swishy spectacle of Capote's
performance. But I also remember feeling a deep pleasure in hearing
Capote make language, in "getting" the fantastic bitchiness of his
quip. Like Gomez, I can locate that experience of suburban
spectatorship as having a disidentificatory impact on me. Capote's
performance was as exhilarating as it was
terrifying. /Disidentifications/ 4
#+END_QUOTE

This memory is distinguished by a powerful disjunction between
opposite feelings, which consitutes identity from ambivalent
affects. The exhilaration that Muñoz feels when he understands
Capote's dig, the surprise of grasping its "fanstastic bitchiness," is
attended by an alternative affect, one of fear of recognition. In this
process, identification emerges in the space between these opposing
sensations---pleasure and terror.

Acts of disidentification can be shattering. In "The Torment of Queer
Literature," Kelly Caldwell explains the quandry of reading James
Baldwin's /Giovanni's Room/ as a transgender woman: "what if the only
available act of identification is one of stigma and shame? Embracing
queerness is often embracing abjection. Sometimes identification is
loss and despair" (par. 4). Identification tends to center around
these "bad feelings" which offer less fodder for political
resistence. However, identification with more positive aspects of
queer experience is hardly an alternative. For many readers, the more
redemptive or celebratory narratives offer no consolation. The reader
is stuck between recognizing their own pain or feeling guilty for not
recognizing pleasure: "Either read a book like /Giovanni’s Room/ at
the risk of recognizing David’s denial and repression as my own, or
read a book that celebrates queer lives and sex boldly and end up
despising my own cowardice" (par. 17).

This sensation of opposing affects and the shattering of identity has
been well explored by queer Chicana Theorists Gloria Anzaldúa and
Cherríe Moraga. Anzaldúa's figure of /la mestiza/, or mixed woman,
drawn from Mexican philosopher Jose Vasconcelos's promotion of "una
raza mestiza" [the mixed race], emphasizes hybridity as a structuring
component of identity. Mestizaje is the experience of being mixed, at
the intersection of two opposing forces, "Cradled in one culture,
sandwiched between two cultures," being able to contain dualities,
such as male/female, English/Spanish, American/Mexican (78). Mestiza
consciousness, for Anzaldúa, is a tolerance for ambiguity, for
existing in the middle space that contains dualities. This
consciousness is characterized by what Anzaldúa calls the experience
of /el choque/ or the shock: "The coming together of two
self-consistent but habitually incompatible frames of referencee
causes /un choque/, a cultural collision" (78). The affective
experience of /el choque/ consists of a bodily phenomenon where the
subject receives multiple opposing messages that incite a physical
upheaval. Anzaldúa explains that "the clash of voices results in
mental and emotional states of perplexity... The mestiza's dual or
multiple personality is plagued by psychic restlessness" (78). This
physical upheaval is the ground from which the mestiza builds
identity: "The new mestiza copes by developing a tolerance for
contradictions, a tolerance for ambiguity. She learns to be an Indian
in Mexican culture, to be Mexican from an Anglo point of view.  She
learns to juggle cultures" (79).

The choque experienced in acts of queer disidentification points to a
core condition of queerness that is incommensurable. Latina feminist
philosopher Ofelia Schutte poses the concept of the "incommensurable"
to theorize cross-cultural communication between dominant and
subaltern subjects. Writing specifically about communication between
native English and Spanish speakers, Schutte wonders how subjects from
different cultures might achieve effective conversation. She finds
that they cannot, as "no two cultures or languages can be perfectly
transparent to each other" (56). There is something lost in
translation, "a residue of meaning that will not be reached in
cross-cultural endeavors" (56). This vestige of communication that
fails to transfer between subaltern and dominant subjects is what she
calls the incommensurable. Schutte draws from feminist postcolonial
and poststructuralist concepts of alterity and difference to present a
view of subjectivity in which "the other is that person or experience
which makes it possible for the self to recognize its own limited
horizons in the light of asymmetrically given relations marked by
sexual, social, cultural, or other differences" (54). The effect of
incommensurability, then, is not to try to grasp or translate the
vestige of lost meaning, but to recognize that gap as a space that
constitutes subjectivity. It is to "look at nodes in a linguistic
interchange or a conversation in which the other's speech, or some
aspect of it, resonates in me as a kind of strangeness, as a kind of
displacement of the usual expectation" (56). Schutte proposes that one
embrace the strangeness of communication, locating the moments where
meaning seems to slip by and elude us. By paying attention to the
awkward and even bizarre moments of misunderstanding, we find the
materials for constructing new dis(identity).

As Cherríe Moraga points out, "it is not really difference the
oppressor fears so much as similarity" (La Guera, 30). Although the
feeling of incommensurability is central to queer experience, it can
be accessible to majority groups. Getting in touch with the /choque/,
however, is a great challenge for minority subjects, and an even
greater challenge for those of dominant cultures. For those who can
avoid it, there is an aversion to confront the "stranger within."
Schutte goes into detail to explain how the incommensurable slips from
view:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
In cross-cultural communication, each speaker may "say" something that
falls on the side of the "unsaid" for a culturally differentiated
interlocutor. Such gaps in communication may cause one speaker's
discourse to appear incoherent or insufficiently organized. To the
culturally dominant speaker, the subaltern speaker's discourse may
appear to be a string of fragmented observations rather than a unified
whole. The actual problem may not be incoherence but the lack of
cultural translatability of the signifiers for coherence from one set
of cultural presuppositions to the other. 62
#+END_QUOTE

For majority subjects, confronting the incommensurable is difficult
because it requires them to step temporarily into the place of the
other, "that person or experience which makes it possible for the
self to recognize its own limited horizons in the light of
asymmetrically given relations marked by sexual, social, cultural, or
other differences" (Schutte 54). Subjects from dominant society opt to
avoid engaging in minority discourse. Schutte explains that "The
speaker from the dominant culture is basically saying: communicate
with me entirely on the terms I expect; beyond this, I am not
interested" (62).

*** TODO draft reading practices try to resolve incommens: sedgwick
The reality of incommensurability points to ways that knowledge will
always be flawed, never complete, and never self-evident. When
confronted with the unknown, however, the impulse is to find ways of
resolving it. The illusion that we can gain sufficient knowledge into
queer experience, that such experiences are "commensurable," drives
certain reading practices that critics describe as "paranoid" or
"suspicious." Here, the assumption that knowledge is knowable masks a
deeper investment in knowledge as a goal in and of itself. This
reading practice not only assumes queer experience and subjectivity to
be fundamentally accessible, but bases an entire program of analysis
on revealing it. Kadji Amin, Amber Jamilla Musser, and Roy Pérez
explain that paranoid impulses "rely on the concept of immutable
difference, on sharp boundaries, and on the possibility of
exhaustively knowing the other" (232).

Paranoid reading practices deliver results that are imaginable within
given knowledge structures. To illustrate this effect, Eve Kosofsky
Sedgwick relates a conversation between herself and a friend during
few years of the AIDS crisis, when speculation about the government's
complicity in spreading the virus is rampant. At the time, Sedgwick
wonders whether "the lives of African Americans are worthless in the
eyes of the United States; that gay men and drug users are held cheap
where they aren't actively hated" (123). Her friend counters this
suspicion, pointing out that knowledge of conspiracy doesn't achieve
anything on its own: "Supposing we were ever sure of all those
things---what would we know then that we don't already know?"
(123). Merely knowing that something is true, revealing the presence
of systematic oppression, injustice, discrimination, does nothing. As
Sedgwick explains, knowledge of a problem is not enough to "enjoin
that person to any specific train of epistemological or narrative
consequences" (123). Moreover, a paranoid or suspicious stance blocks
out other possibilities for relation to the text. Paranoia often only
affirms itself; reflecting and replicating itself in every surface,
giving too much power to the act of exposure. The work of paranoia is
never done, "for all its vaunted suspicion, [paranoia] acts as though
its work would be accomplished if only it could finally, this time,
somehow get its story truly known" (141). Like many other theorists,
Sedgwick wonders what is the point of continually trying to reveal,
unravel, deconstruct the injustices of the past. She searches for
"some ways of understanding human desire that might be quite to the
side of prohibition and repression, that might hence be structured
quite differently from the heroic, 'liberatory,' inescapably dualistic
righteousness of hunting down and attacking prohibition/repression in
all its chameleonic guises" (10).

*** TODO revise queerness irrecoverable, but tempting ID: Love

The more hopeless and resistant queer subjects make for more tempting
identifications. Love explains how these subjects remain beyond the
reader's grasp: "As queer readers we tend to see ourselves as reaching
back toward isolated figures in the queer past in order to rescue or
save them. It is hard to know what to do with texts that resist our
advances" (8). The reason that these subjects remain so unreachable
has to do with the nature of queerness itself, which represents
absence, loss, and failure. Love illustrates this quality by evoking a
Greek myth, Orpheus and Eurydice, in which the lover botches his
beloved's rescue by looking back at her as they exit the
underworld. Love quotes from Maurice Blanchot's account of the story
in "The Gaze of Orpheus," to describe what Orpheus searches for in the
prohibited and doomed glance backward:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE 
Not to look would be infidelity to the measureless, imprudent force
of his movement, which does not want Eurydice in her daytime truth and
in her everyday appeal, but wants her in her nocturnal obscurity, in
her distance, with her closed body and sealed face---wants to see her
not when she is visible, but when she is invisible, and not as the
intimacy of familiar life, but as the foreignness of what excludes all
intimacy, and wants, not to make her live, but to have living in her
the plenditude of death. 50
#+END_QUOTE 

Orpheus's downfall is his desire for a glimpse at what cannot be
grapsed, at what remains beyond the light. This desire is not for
"daytime truth" but for "noctural obscurity," which is always receding
at the moment of pursuit. Like Eurydice, queerness emerges only to
slip away, turning its face from the parched gaze. Can we be blamed
for looking for that which cannot be grasped? No, because queerness
has always been structured by that which is not, by what Love calls
"impossible love" (24). Not only is queerness projected to fail, it is
a project of failure. Love reminds us that "Queer history has been an
education in absence" (50). In learning failure and loss, queer
readers can only identify with what they have been taught to recognize
as untouchable. Full identification, like Eurydice in the daylight, is
prevented by design.

[here begin to write about Cvetkovitch on Stone Butch Blues, and/or
Butler on touching?]

*** TODO add the untouchable Queer, Butler & Cvetkovitch
*** TODO draft disciplinary boundaries, Kazanjian on overreading

--> Methodology is a result of disciplinary boundaries, and there is a
lot we can learn from history and science.  

--> Kazanjian is an intro to looking at paranoia across the
disciplines.

David Kazanjian, “Scenes of Speculation,” Social Text 33:4 (2015),
77-84.

The charge of “overreading” -- the idea that we are attributing a
contemporary meaning to a historical text. This presumes a strict
separation between historically contextualized reading and ahistorical
reading, saying that we can read as if we are in the same situation as
the writer. Kazanjian calls for overreading “for scenes of
speculation” When we make historicist readings, we end up “making
theoretical claims about the who in question, claims that imply or
assert a theory of the subject”, in which they have a self-conscious
will or desire (81). Every historicist reading is implies a level of
imposition by the reader.

Kazanjian suggests that we attend less to the wills, desires, and
voices of historical subjects and more to the textual traces which
invite speculative work.  “Unfinished recovery [of the archives] is
the very condition of possibility for their ongoing interpretation”
(83).  → what are we trying to solve?

*** TODO clean paranoia and replication: haraway

 It is, in Donna Haraway's words, a search for the "one code
that translates all meaning perfectly, the central dogma of
phallogocentrism" (/Simians, Cyborgs, and Women/ 176).

In order to understand the ways that the paranoid impulse harm and
constrain inquiry, it is useful to view it at work in scientific
disciplines. Some strains of scientific inquiry, in particular, show
us how paranoia enacts a self-replicating mechanic. Though it appears
in much of literary studies, the impulse that drives paranoid reading
is borrowed from a critical viewpoint in scientific inquiry that
assumes a detached observer. Critiques of this position, particularly
in Donna Haraway's work on primatology, attempt to articulate a new
mode of feminist science that de-naturalizes the "natural." Haraway's
research on primates reveals the ways in which assumptions and
preconceptions from the (white, male) subject inflect the object of
study. She examines how scientists bring their own investments to bear
even in the seemingly benign questions they might ask, or qualities
they isolate, as areas of interest. For example, primatologists
working with the goal of studying social structures in the field often
impose their own social structures by turning their assumptions of
male dominance into "observations." Feminist scientists attempt to
revise such narratives by emphasizing organization and cooperation
among primate communities: "revisionists have stressed matrifocal
groups, long-term social cooperation rather than short-term
spectacular aggression, flexible process rather than strict structure”
(19). Pointing out that, “Women know very well that knowledge from the
natural sciences has been used in the interests of our domination and
not our liberation," Harwaway asserts that such revision is about
empowering the subjugated, reconceiving “female receptivity” as
"female choice" (8). The creation of a subject/object split
/reproduces/ and legitimizes hierarchies of domination.

*** TODO add Barad on replication / representationalism

Barad on representationalism. 

Joan Scott: the way that literary critics approach vision vs other
fields

Scott, Joan. “The Evidence of Experience”:
- Using experience for evidence rather than thinking about how
  experience is shaped. Scott talks about representation, about
  looking at experience, at the vision, the optical effects, for what
  they suggest. The beautiful reading of Samuel Delany’s vision of the
  “millions of gay men” the fantastical projection (rather than real
  identity) that suggests a political consciousness. Historiography is
  about modes of seeing.
- Experience is always mediated for literary critics. We never take a
text as referential---there is rhetoric and form.

*** TODO revise paranoia and recovery, hartman on limits of language

Not only does paranoid inquiry tend to replicate the assumptions of
the observer, but it blocks out other forms of knowledge. This is
especially evident in the work of historical recovery, in the impulse
to find "hidden" or "forgotten" meaning in textual and archival
material. Recovery works by a self-legitimizing and perpetuating logic
that attempts to render what has been left out, disregarded, or
misunderstood within the logic of dominance. It is Jacques Derrida's
/archive fever/, or the desire for legibility, under the auspices of
the ruler, which animates the endless search for origins. It is, in
Haraway's words, a search for the "one code that translates all
meaning perfectly, the central dogma of phallogocentrism" (/Simians,
Cyborgs, and Women/ 176).

The stakes of recovery work are uniquely stark in the history of the
Black Atlantic, where researchers must work to square the growth of an
inhuman practice within a historical narrative of progress and
liberalization. A tradition that rationalizes slavery with the right
to property, that justifies war through the social contract. Black
Atlantic scholars Lisa Lowe and Saidiya Hartman point out that the
central paradox of studying the archive of slavery is the structuring
condition of recovery. In her essay "History Hesitant," Lowe explains
that because recovery work necessarily occurs within the limits of the
authorizing power, it always subjects itself to that power. Rather
that work under these conditions, historians of enslaved experience
ought to examine this confining structure, "the archeology of
knowledge through which the archive subjects and governs precisely by
means of instruments that absent the humanity of the enslaved”
(87). Researchers might examine, for example, how "the slave trader’s
desire to record, measure, list, and account" weigh up against
"rationalist claims to produce truth or meaning about the terrors of
captivity, enslavement, or torture" (88). Saidiya Hartman similarly
turns to the question of epistemology as the crux of the recovery
work: “If it is no longer sufficient to expose the scandal, then how
might it be possible to generate a different set of descriptions from
this archive?" (7).

Oftentimes, new tools can obscure the ways that we replicate our own
assumptions. The advent of photography in the mid-nineteenth century
allowed subjects to codify their prejudices as science, for example,
in the pictures of American slaves taken by Louis Agassiz
in 1850. These daguerrotypes, a pioneering practice in photography
that uses light-sensitive chemicals on silver plates, show how the
impulse for scientific classification impacts the quality and kind of
knowledge that results. Agassiz, a Swiss anthropologist, came to the
United States to study the physical differences between European
whites and African blacks, by examining the shape and character of
their heads and torsos, similar to contemporary studies in physionomy
and phrenology that analyzed the exterior form of the human
body. Agassiz's goal was to amass evidence to support his theory, that
mankind had been separately created and whites and blacks were in fact
different species (Wallis 40). Using photography for anthropoligical
purposes, and organizing photographs to support a classification
system, Agassiz's work demonstrates how the apparent "objectivity" of
the photograph can mask the highly subjective motives for
classification. Writing about the photographs, which were exhibited by
the Amon Carter Museum in 1992, Brian Wallis explains that such images
were organized to suggest divisions between "self and other, healthy
and diseased, normal and pathological," with the insidious effect of
"mask[ing] its subjective distortions in the guise of logic and
organization" (Wallis 47, 54-55). The problem, Wallis points out, is
the realism of the photographic tool obscures the ways that subjects
harness it to solidify their preconceptions---"Strengthened by the
seeming transparency of photographic realism, these categories and the
divisions between them soon took on the authority of natural 'facts.'
Supplying either too much or too little information, photographs soon
muddied the easy distinctions between subjective knowledge and what
was called "objective." (47-48). The more seeminly transparent the
tool, the easier it is to wrangle it toward proving "self-evident"
truths.

In this case, the apparent fidelity of the photographic tool to record
"nature" in fact obscures the ways that using the tool only reinforces
a preconceived notion of "nature." Wallis explains that, "Supplying
either too much or too little information, photographs soon muddied
the easy distinctions between subjective knowledge and what was called
'objective' (48). The photographs reinforce the ways that scientific
tools, which appear to capture "reality," can be harnessed and
manipulated toward the observer's purpose.

Hartman's central problem is what to do with an absent archive. She
leaves us the paradox of recovery work: "How does one revisit the
scene of subjection without replicating the grammar of violence?"
(4). Hartman writes caustically about the impossibility of telling
stories that have been left out of the record. Not only that we can
never recover these stories (they are lost to time) but we can not
approximate them with our current tools, with language. In "Venus in
Two Acts," Hartman tells the story of Black Venus, the unnamed slave
woman who appears variously throughout the "offical" record:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
we could have as easily encountered her in a ship’s ledger in the
tally of debits; or in an overseer’s journal—--“last night I laid with
Dido on the ground”; or as an amorous bed-fellow with a purse so
elastic “that it will contain the largest thing any gentleman can
present her with” in Harris’s List of Covent- Garden Ladies; or as the
paramour in the narrative of a mercenary soldier in Surinam; or as a
brothel owner in a traveler’s account of the prostitutes of Barbados;
or as a minor character in a nineteenth-century pornographic novel. 1
#+END_QUOTE

[TODO a better close reading of the above block quote, what are the
figures here?]  

What draws all these iterations of Venus together is their silence,
"no one remembered her name or recorded the things she said, or
observed that she refused to say anything at all" (2). The fact of
silence cuts deeper than the failure of history but is part of the
condition known as the "violence of the archive," which denotes not
only absence as a form of evidence, in that the physical records are
missing, but also in the tools of expression, in language that cannot
approximate the reality of experience, and in the audible discourse
that dictates silence.

[end this section with a meditation on language not being enough. Now
I should then turn to the question of embodiment. The body will show
the way.]

*** TODO cut/revise post-critical reading: sedgwick & felski 
Just as we are limited by language, cannot approximate, we are also
stuck within the bodies of our thinking: emotion is inescapable in
criticism, whether it is suspicious or not. We are attached to what we
write about.

Let's approach this attachment as an opportunity. The fact that we
cannot be objective opens a window. 

**** Felski on the illusion of emotional detachment:

The reality is that we are stuck in these bodies of our thinking. Rita
Felski describes how seemingly neutral and detatched critical stance
belies an emotional disposition:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Scholars like to think that their claims stand or fall on the merits
of their reasoning and the irresistible weight of their evidence, yet
they also adopt a low-key affective tone that can bolster or
drastically diminish their allure. Critical detachment, in this light,
is not an absence of mood but one manifestation of it---a certain
orientation toward one's subject, a way of making one's argument
matter. 6
#+END_QUOTE

The "low-key affective tone" of scholarly discourse suggests that
affect, and the feeling subject associated with it, has been left out
of the critical process. However, appealing to the apparently
unemotional does not succeed in removing emotion from argument---this
is impossible---but it does reinforce the illusion that emotions don't
belong in rational thought. Actually they do---though the emotions of
critical discourse are of a quality and degree that mask their own
presence. Felski explains that, “Rather than an ascetic exercise in
demystification, suspicious reading turns out to be a style of thought
infused with a range of passions and pleasures, intense engagements
and eager commitments” (9). One follows the exposition of the framing
paradigms, the twists and turns of the driving question, the climax of
of discovery followed by the of denouement of the conclusion, one
immediately senses the full dramatic repertoire of critical
inquiry. 

**** Felski & Sedgwick affective approaches

Critics like Rita Felski and Eve Sedgwick adopt an alternative
approach toward reading that exposes knowledge as derived from
embodied experience. Felski talks about reading as an affective
orientation, where readers position themselves and their desires
around texts. Felski critiques the popular orientation in literary
criticism centered on what Paul Riceour has called the “hermeneutics
of suspicion”---the desire to unmask and demystify the secrets of
literary works. According to Felski, critics generally behave as if
language is always withholding some truth, that the critic’s task is
to reveal the unsaid or repressed. She identifies the affective modes
of suspicion to include disenchantment, vigilance, paranoia. 

Sedgwick makes a similar assertion about tendencies of "paranoid
reading," though she bases her critique on Michele Foucault's
repressive hypothesis from his /History of Sexuality, Vol. 1/, which
approaches discussions on sex and sexuality through the lense of
repression or prohibition. Rather than excavating the workings of the
repressive hypothesis, Foucault is interested in the ways that
discourse on sex has proliferated, in its multiplications that avoid
censure while satisfying the desire for sexual discourse. Left with no
place to go, discussion on sex simply continued to spread by
transforming itself into palatable discourses such as Marxism,
pyschoanalytic, libertarian, etc. By looking for the specter of
sex/power dynamics in these discourses, Foucault seems to work outside
the logic of the repressive hypothesis. But this is not the
case. Sedgwick explains that, "the almost delirious promise of the
book" is "the suggestion that there might be ways of thinking around
[the repressive hypothesis]" (9). In fact, Sedgwick explains that
Foucault's inquiry has been, from the start, structured by repression
and prohibition. She finds that the "critical analysis of repression
is itself inseparable from repression" (10). 

Felski and Sedgwick see a dead end in militant reading practices. 

Felski's nightmare: 
Sedgwick's wish: 

"How do we step outside the repressive hypothesis "to forms of thought
that would not be structured by the question of prohibition in the
first place?" (/Touching Feeling/ 11).

Speaking on Foucault's repressive hypothesis: "I knew what I wanted
from it: some ways of understanding human desire that might be quite
to the side of prohibition and repression, that might hence be
structured quite differently from the heroic, 'liberatory',
inescapably dualistic righteousness of hunting down and attacking
prohibition/repression in all its chameleonic guises" (/Touching
Feeling/ 10).

Felski shows how this suspicion toward texts forecloses other possible
readings while providing no guarantee of rigorous or radical
thought. Rather than adopt a suspicious attitude, Felski suggests that
literary scholars try “postcritical reading," which looks to what the
text suggests or makes possible. Felski wonders what if we allowed
ourselves to be marked or struck by what we read. Then, rather than
just be a cognitive activity, reading can become an “embodied mode of
attentiveness that involves us in acts of sensing, perceiving,
feeling, registering, and engaging” (176).

Reading is about movement 


Postcritical Reading --- "Reading, in this light, is a matter of
attaching, collating, negotiating, assembling—of forging links between
things that were previously unconnected”… “Reading, in this sense, is
not just a cognitive activity but an embodied mode of attentiveness
that involves us in acts of sensing, perceiving, feeling, registering,
and engaging” (Felski 176).

**** Sedgwick on generative shame
What if we read Henry James mobilizing shame as a creative resource?
  For many queer people, shame is a structuring force in their
  identity. But this doesn’t mean we need to be negative, we can look
  to the ways that shame unlocks creativity and productivity---to the
  ways that metaphors are made possible through shame. James’
  “blushing”, “flushing” is linked to a fantasy of the skin being
  entered, or touched by a hand. GLOVE, GAGE, GAGEURE…  We can reclaim
  a negative affect of shame and approach it as a generative force.
- "Shame interests me politically, then, because it generates and
  legitimates the place of identity--the question of identity--at the
  origin of the impulse to the performative, but does so without
  giving that identity space the standing of an essence. It
  constitutes the as-to-be-constituted, which is also to say, as
  already there for the (necessary, productive) misconstrual and
  misrecognition. Shame--living, as it does, on and in the face--seems
  to be uniquely contagious from one person to another. And the
  contagiousness of shame is only facilitated by its anamorphic,
  protean susceptibility to new expressive grammars" (63).

*** TODO revise hesitation, critical distance is necessary: Lowe
-> To avoid paranoid methods we develop a critical distance, we turn to
the ways that "touch" can be distanced. 

Within the dominant culture, recovery means authorizing the structures
of knowledge that give rise to injustice in the first place. So what
do we do now? There are affects associated with this kind of
impasse. We hold ourselves back, restraint, avoidance. Lowe explains
that

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Hesitation, rather than rushing to recover what has been
lost, need not be understood as inaction or postponement, or as a
thwarting of the wish to provide for a future world. Rather, it halts
the desire for recognition by the present social order and staves off
the compulsion to make visible within current epistemological
orthodoxy. 98
#+END_QUOTE

Feelings of hesitation, doubt, dissapointment are ways of protecting
the archive of slavery from further exploitation.

To sum up: one solution to paranoid impulses involves is critical
awareness, the ability to access the affects that come between you and
the object of study. 

The archivist must work within the discrepancy between reality and the
historical record. Hartman's goal is "to expose and exploit the
incommensurability between the experience of the enslaved and the
fictions of history... the requirements of narrative, the stuff of
subjects and plots and ends" (10).

*** TODO refine /feeling backward/ as touching at a distance
--> Love offers a model of "feeling backward" which is a way for critics
to connect with queer subjects in a way that keeps objects out of the
critic's reach. 

Heather Love offers a reading strategy that acknowledges queer
experience, particularly suffering, as unconsoleable. In resisting the
temptations to redeem psychic suffering by queer subjects, Heather
Love offers a strategy called "feeling-backward." This strategy opens
a space for bad feelings without trying to recuscitate, justify, or
transform them. She focuses on feelings such as "nostalgia, regret,
shame, despair, /ressentiment/, passivity escapism, self-hatred,
withdrawal, bitterness, defeatism, and loneliness," which, according
to Love, are tied to "the historical impossibility of same-sex desire"
(4, emphasis original). She examines the burdened protagonists from
famous modernist texts like Walter Pater's /The Renaissance: Studies
in Art and Poetry/ (1873), Radclyffe Hall's /The Well of Loneliness/
(1928), Willa Cather's /My Ántonia/ (1918), and Sylvia Townsend
Warner's /Summer Will Show/ (1936). Love argues that the shame and
stigma experienced by these characters ought to be recognized rather
than resolved. Instead of turning negative histories into sites of
resistance or affirmation, these hurting characters might have full
reign over their own darkness. And this darkness must be where the
critic will meet them.

Love proposes a method in which the goal is not to redeem queer
subjects or resolve queer failure. Rather, the problem of
identification is turned to a reading strategy: "I want to suggest a
mode of historiography that recognizes the inevitability of a 'play of
recogniztions,' but that also sees these recognitions not as consoling
but as shattering" (45). Reading, for Love, can enact a "play of
recognitions," which is a way of making fleeting connections that do
not presume complete understanding. It is a way of identifying, but
not fully. Full identification would attempt to wrench the subject
from its suffering, and effectively transform it into something
else. Rather that attempt to rescusitate it, Love looks to the ways
that identity unsettles and dissolves subjectivity. She gives the
example of Stephen Gordon from Radclyffe Hall's /The Well of
Loneliness/. Once considered too depressing as a model of lesbianism,
recent critics have cast Stephen Gordon as a transgender figure. Love
resists this label, maintaining that Stephen is “beyond the reach of
such redemptive narratives” (119). The question, for Love, is not
whether Stephen is a pre-op FTM (Female-to-Male), but how Stephen’s
existential negativity can be read as an embodied phenonmenon, as “a
social experience insistently internalized and corporeal” (108).


