* "'A Melon, an Emerald, a Fox in the Snow': Quantifying Gender in Virginia Woolf's /Orlando: A Biography/"
** Introduction

The novel /Orlando: A Biography/ (1928), by Virginia Woolf, famously
opens with an assertive gender designation followed by an immediate
qualification: “He--for there could be no doubt of his sex, though the
fashion of the time did something to disguise it—-was in the act of
slicing at the head of a Moor which swung from the rafters” (11). When
performing quantitative text analysis on this text, a fictional
biography of a 16th-century English nobleman who undergoes a sex
change, the standard tasks of "pre-processing" evacuate the ways that
gender is complicated in this sentence. In order to perform
quantitative analysis, a process which involves calculating and
visualizing textual patterns, the text must first be transformed into
a computable format.[fn:1] This task of pre-processing (also called
“cleaning” or “normalizing”) strips the original text of capitalized
words, punctuation, “stop words” (such as articles and prepositions),
and inflections in word endings, all of which are deemed to be
semantically minor, and would affect the analysis of more substantial
features like nouns, verbs, adverbs, and adjectives. Afterward, the
following list of words, or “tokens,” remain in the first sentence:
#+BEGIN_QUOTE
‘could’, ‘doubt’, ‘sex’, ‘though’, ‘fashion’, ‘time’, ‘something’,
‘disguise’, ‘act’, ‘slicing’, ‘head’, ‘moor’, ‘swung’, ‘rafter’.
#+END_QUOTE
Cleaning this text not only strips it of its pronouns, including the
gender assertion in the first word, “He.” It also cuts the em dash
immediately following this "He," which signals the entrance of a
narrator's conspicuous certitude: "—-for there could be no doubt of
his sex...."

This chapter examines how quantitative text analysis works with
gender, using Woolf's /Orlando/ as a test case. It explores an
experimental approach that deconstructs gender binaries by drawing
connections between computer programming and gender theory. This
analysis contrasts the principle /iteration/, central to both text
analysis and gender theory, with current /reproducible/ methods in
quantitative analysis. It concludes by proposing a text analysis
methodology that iterates through distant and close reading of the
terms "woman" and "man" in /Orlando/, and considers the limitations of
this method within the larger trajectory of Gender Studies.

** The Fantasy of the Falsifiable
Because computers can process hundreds of texts at a time, "reading"
at much faster rates than humans, they attract critics like Franco
Moretti, Matthew Jockers, and Ted Underwood who pose ambitious
questions about literary history.  Moretti, for example, explains that
the process of quantification reduces the complexity of text to open
the potential for its analysis: "fewer elements, hence a sharper sense
of their overall interconnection" (/Graphs/ 1). This approach toward
computation represents what I call the "fantasy of the falsifiable."
Leaving aside critiques of Moretti, particularly in light of the
credible allegations of harrasment and assault by graduate students
(see Lauren F. Klein, "Distant Reading After Moretti"),[fn:2] I want
to focus on Moretti's early essay "The Soul and the Harpy" (1983),
which lays out the reasoning behind developing a new methodological
approach for literary criticism. Moretti in this essay betrays a deep
suspicion about the analytical practices of the contemporary literary
criticism that "multipl[ies], rather than reduc[es], the obstacles
every social science encounters when it tries to give itself a
testable foundation," and the literary critic that he likens to a kind
of Narcissus, "whose only pleasure lay in contemplating his own
reflection" ("Soul" 22, 14). Moretti proposes an alternative
methodology, a "falsifiable criticism," that grounds the critical
process in hypotheses that "test" literary interpretations ("Soul"
21). /Falsifiable/ here means verifiable, pursuing answers that are
"coherent, univocal, and complete" ("Soul" 21). The goal, according to
Moretti, is to reach irrefutable conclusions: "The day criticism gives
up the battle cry 'it is possible to interpret this element in the
following way', to replace it with the much more prosaic 'the
following interpretation is impossible for such and such a reason', it
will have taken a huge step forward on the road of methodological
solidity" ("Soul" 22).

As Moretti's falsifiable criticism eventually grows into "distant
reading," he streamlines his critical method into a recursive process
of posing hypotheses, assembling data, making inferences, and
occasionally, reframing the original hypotheses. For example, when
studying the effect of market forces on book titles from 1740-1850,
Moretti finds an interesting relationship between the size of the
market and the length of titles: "As the market expands, titles
contract; as they do that, they learn to compress meaning" (204). When
explaining his process, however, his word choice diminishes the
interpretive moves he makes throughout his critical analysis:
#+begin_quote
first, I describe a major metamorphosis of eighteenth-century titles,
and /try to explain/ its causes; next, I /suggest/ how a new type of
title that emerged around 1800 may have changed what readers expected
of novels; and finally, I /make a little attempt/ at quantitative
stylistics... (181-2; emphasis mine)
#+END_QUOTE
The word choices here repeatedly diminish the interpretive moves
Moretti makes at each stage of his analysis. As Stephen Ramsay points
out, Moretti tends to present his insights as an objective description
of reality, which is portrayed through his graphs and other
visualizations. It is as if "data is presented to us... not as
something that is also in need of interpretation" (Ramsay 5).

Ironically, the faith in falsifiable criticism gets its strongest
expression in a famous detraction by Nan Z. Da, who argues that
quantitative methods, which trade "speed for accuracy, and coverage
for nuance," reveal a "fundamental mismatch betwen the statistical
tools that are used and the objects to which they are applied," (620,
601). Da emphasizes her point with an experiment in "Topic Modeling,"
a machine learning method that generates a number of "topics," or
keywords, from large collections of text. Da attempts to verify the
results of a topic modelling experiment by replicating the process on
her own computer, but she fails to produce the same results and
concludes that the method is ineffective. However, as Ben Schmidt
explains, the difference in her results is due to the use of different
parameters and software that Da uses to run her
experiments. Additionally, he points out that, "Far /more/ than anyone
I’ve seen in any humanities article, she asserts that scientists do
something arcane, powerful, and true.[fn:3] Despite their vastly
different views on the role of quantitative methods for studying
literature, Da and Moretti appear to agree that these methods ought to
provide results that are, at the very least, reproducible.

Interested in the interpretive possibilities of quantification, Ted
Underwood explores what he calls "perspectival models" of literary
data. Underwood explains that "Machine learning algorithms are
actually bad at being objective and rather good at absorbing human
perspectives implicit in the evidence used to train them" ("Machine
Learning and Human Perspective" 92). First, Underwood trains an
algorithm with sample data, such as descriptions of characters tagged
with gender identities. Then, he feeds this data into the algorithm,
which "learns" what words are typically associated with women and
which words are typically associated with men. At the end of this
training process, the resulting model can then predict the gender of
characters in new text. Underwood calls this approach "perspectival
modelling," because it represents a single, rather than objective or
universal, perspective of the data. Dan Sinykin explains that this
method enables Underwood "to leverag[e] the human prejudices built
into modeling toward humanistic ends" (par. 4). In one project,
Underwood uses a logistic regression algorithm to calculate and
visualize the terms typically associated with each gender in books by
men and books by women (See fig. 1). Here, each axis represents a
different perspective on gender. The verticle axis visualizes words by
women, and the horizontal by men, with positive numbers signifying
overrepresentation of certain words. The terms on the left side of the
graph describe men, with the top-left corner and bottom-left corner
denoting books by male and female authors, respectively. The terms on
the right side of the graph describe women, with the top-right corner
and bottom-right corner denoting books by female and male authors,
respectively. Underwood explains that, "I needed a simple picture,
frankly, in order to explain how a quantitative model can be said to
represent a perspective" ("Machine Learning and Human Perspective"
98).

[[./img/Underwood.png]]
Fig. 1: Underwoods logistic regression model. 

Underwood's methodology, however, reinscribes the same binary that it
attempts to historicize. Here, he uses uses logistic regression
analysis, an entry-level machine learning algorithm that makes
predictions on a scale from 0 to 1. The problem is that this
probablistic computation reifies gender as either/or, in other words,
as a binary opposition, which Underwood admits himself when he says
that "gender theorists will be frustrated by the binary structure of
the diagram" ("Machine Learning" 98). Here, the concept of femininity
is deliberately consolidated and computed against that of masculinity,
which is precisely the purpose of a binary classification
algorithm--to collapse all possible answers between a scale of
yes/no. Feeding gender terms into such an algorithm effectively
imposes a binary structure onto those terms.

In my view, such an approach undershoots the potential of quantitative
methods for studying gender, not to mention the goal of attaining some
kind of overarching knowledge about literary history, whether that be
a "distant horizon" or "the great unread." Distant reading methods
might instead harness what Ramsay describes as "the objectivity of the
machine," to destabilize the binary (x).[fn:4] Resisting the
temptations of falsifiable criticism, work by critics like Susan
Brown, Laura Mandell, Richard Jean So, and Edwin Roland apply distant
reading methods toward deconstructing social categories like gender
and race. Brown and Mandell explain that, "The goal is to acknowledge
the subjective effects of belonging to an identity constituted
historically through oppression without believing that the identity
itself exists independently from historical conditions" (Mandell and
Brown 6).[fn:5] This position places computational methods within a
discursive frame, aligning it with debates from post-structuralist
feminist theory that explore and provoke the representative capacities
of language. The computer becomes a tool for exploring how language
constructs (and can deconstruct) social categories.

In a critique of distant reading methods, Mandell illustrates how the
study of gender often reifies gender stereotypes, "presenting
conclusions about 'male' and 'female' modes of thinking and writing as
if the M/F terms were simple pointers to an unproblematic reality,
transparently referential and not discursively constituted"
(par. 5). Mandell's examination marshalls key findings from feminist
theory, drawing from Judith Butler, among others, to assert that
gender is "constructed both by the measurer and the measured"
(par. 38). Computation offers, in Mandell's words, "parallax, multiple
perspectives for viewing a very complex reality” (par. 38). To
deconstruct gender, Mandell turns to genre, another category which
will allow scholars to see the reductive constitution of categories
generally. Here, Mandell uses the popular stylometry measurement,
"Burrow's Delta," which visualizes the "distance" between writing
styles by creating branches (or "deltas") between different texts. She
finds that the stylistic qualities of a female writer, Mary
Wollenstonecraft, shares with those of comparable male writers:
"Wollstonecraft’s sentimental anti-Jacobin novels most resemble
[William] Godwin’s sentimental anti-Jacobin novels... whereas her
essays most resemble [Samuel] Johnson’s writings" (par. 29). Drawing
gender into conversation with genre, Mandell creates categories such
as "'men writing as men,' 'women writing as women,' 'women writing as
men,' 'men writing as women,' 'unspecified (anonymous) writing as
men,'" and so on (par. 35).

Just as quantification can be harnessed to deonstruct the M/F binary,
so it can deconstruct what Edwin Roland and Richard Jean So describe
as "the machine's initial binary understanding of race" (68). Roland
and So deconstruct racial categories by experimenting with an
algorithm that evaluates an author's race based on diction. Analyzing
a large corpora of novels by white and black authors, they find that,
black authors generally display more varied vocabulary than white
authors (66). From this result, they infer that white authorship, as a
category, only coheres against the variance of black
authorship. Whiteness, they explain, /depends/ on the characterization
of blackness.

This quantitative exercise points Roland and So toward a peculiarity
in the results: that the algorithm wrongly categorizes James Baldwin's
novel /Giovanni's Room/ (1956) as being written by a white
author. This misclassification is attributable to a single word,
"appalled," which the computer (mistakenly) reads as proof of white
authorsip. Going back to the text, Roland and So discover that this
term occurs only once, in an early scene where the narrator David
describes his strained relationship to his father: "I did not want to
be his buddy. I wanted to be his son. What passed between us as
masculine candor exhausted and /appalled/ me" (my emphasis; Rpt. in
Roland, So 71). Noting the connotations of whiteness in "appalled,"
which has the middle French root, "apalir," meaning "to grow pale,"
Roland and So posit that this term suggests a relation between gender
and race: "the moment David develops a troubled relationship to
normative masculinity [as] also the moment he becomes 'white'"
(71). The computer's misclassification, as they point out, reinforces
this text's notorious elision of explicit references to race, as
critics have observed in the scholarship on this novel, whereby racial
markers are displaced in favor of an implicit whiteness. Taking the
computer's mistake as a starting point, Roland and So's analysis thus
contributes to the ongoing debate about the complex relationship
between gender and race in the novel.

Because race is a social construct, and machines only impute meaning
that is encoded into them, Roland and So reason that machines are
ideal instruments for studying the construction of race (60). In
direct opposition to the "falsifiable" position, computational error
here becomes a starting point for analysis. Furthermore, the machine
error surfaces a yet unexplored aspect related to race, that of
sexuality:
#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Our reading’s destabilization of the machine’s logic of white and
black arises directly from the novel’s expression of queerness. By
queering the machine’s color line, Baldwin’s novel challenges our
initial classifications of the novels as white or black, which had
necessarily effaced a more sophisticated, intersectional view of
social identity. In their current form, our data and model are not
robust enough to handle this kind of intersectionality. 72
#+END_QUOTE
Like Mandell, So and Roland use computational methods to destabilize,
rather than reify, binary categories like male/female, or
white/black. In this case, a single computational error opens a site
for speculation about how whiteness suggests a troubled understanding
of sexuality, where queerness might articulate with race. 

** Iteration
Mandell asserts that both gender and genre "are... highly imitatable,"
so that "anyone can adopt gendered modes of behavior, just as anyone
can write in genres stereotypically labeled M/F" (par. 30). While this
interpretation echoes a common misunderstanding of Butler's theory
(explained further below), gender performativity remains a useful
heuristic for quantitative text analysis. First, the common misreading
of Butler's theory is that gender performativity denotes an act or
series of acts that can be imitated at will.[fn:6] Rather, as Butler
emphasizes in her follow up book, /Bodies that Matter: on the
Discursive Limits of Sex/ (1996), performativity is a compulsory
process that precedes and constitutes subjectivity--it is a mechanism
through which the subject can emerge: "a process of reiteration by
which both 'subjects' and 'acts' come to appear at all" (/Bodies/
xviii). Butler here makes the argument for gender as purely
discursive, where what is experienced as the physical body, from sex
to sexuality, only materializes through the repetition of gender norms
in which each act signals a prior, authorizing norm.[fn:7] This thread
of discursivity, and its implications within a larger trajectory of
Queer Studies, is picked up again in this chapter's conclusion.

To better understand performativity as a discursive phenomenon, it is
helpful to situate Butler's work within the context of second-wave
feminism and its deconstruction of gender binaries. Here, Butler draws
from the work of feminist theorist Luce Irigaray, who asserts that
influential Western thinkers like Plato, Aristotle, and Freud have
defined feminity "on the basis of masculine parameters" (Irigaray,
/The Sex Which Is Not One/ 23).[fn:8] Irigaray argues that the
association of "woman" with "matter" (associated to binaries such as
"rationality/emotion" and "mind/body"), and its subordination to to
male "form" erases the possibility of representing woman at
all. Rather, this binary "produces the feminine as that which must be
excluded for that economy to operate" (Butler, /Bodies/ 10). This
"domesticated" feminine term contrasts to the excessive feminine, the
"necessary outside" of the domesticated feminine (which is also its
enabling condition), that creates a "field of disruptive
possibilities" (Butler, /Bodies/ 13). However, this "unspeakable"
element cannot be invoked directly without subscribing itself to the
ruling structure (Butler, /Bodies/ 12).[fn:9] Butler asks, "how can
one read a text for what does /not/ appear within its own terms, but
which nevertheless constitutes the illegible conditions of its own
legibility?" (/Bodies/ 11). This question--how to express what is not
there, what is refused by the system of the visible--leads Butler to
her theory of gender subversion.

For Butler, theorizing subversion begins by positing the origin of
linguistic signification. She wonders, "Can language simply refer to
materiality, or is language also the very condition under which
materiality may be said to appear?" (/Bodies/ 6). Butler finds that,
in order to refer to a body, language must first assume a
body. Therefore, she reasons, the signification of the body actually
creates the body which it appears to reference: "signification
produces as an /effect/ of its own procedure the very body that it
nevertheless and simultaneously claims to discover as that which
/precedes/ its own action" (6). This reasoning leads Bulter to a major
realization: "the mimetic or representational status of
language.... is not mimetic at all. On the contrary, it is productive,
constitutive, one might even argue performative" (/Bodies/ 6). If
language produces the reality that it seems to merely reference, it
means that subjects are always interpellated, and in fact brought into
subjectivity, by a discourse prior to their their participation in it.

Within this regulatory structure, this significatory circle, lies the
possibility of resistance, the possibility of /resignifying/
meaning. Because language transcends a merely representative function,
because it works to produce meaning, language can be resignified
toward subversive usages by "citing" what Bulter calls a "repudiated"
meaning. Butler offers the famous example in the resignification of
the term "queer," which has been transformed from a term of abjection
to one of empowerment. "Queer" is resignified when it harnesses its
own repudiation, which is an implied but "disavowed abjection [that]
will threaten to expose the self-grounding presumptions of the sexed
subject" (/Bodies/ 3). Each time that "queer" is used, it draws from
this domain of abjection which is repudiated by
heterosexuality. Butler proposes that one "consider this threat and
disruption... as a critical resource in the struggle to articulate the
very terms of symbolic legitimacy and intelligibility" (/Bodies/
3). By citing the repudiated meaning, the term "queer" "resignifyi[es]
the abjection of homosexuality into defiance and legitimacy" (/Bodies/
xxviii).

Here, repetition is key, enabling the introduction of what is external
to the binary into the system. Irigaray achieves this resistance by
"mim[ing] philosophy... and, in the mime, tak[ing] on a language that
effectively cannot belong to her" (Butler, /Bodies/ 12). Irigaray
undermines authority through repetition, by "cit[ing] Plato again and
again, but the citations expose precisely what is excluded from them,
and seek to show and to reintroduce the excluded into the system
itself" (Butler, /Bodies/ 18). Irigaray introduces something external
to the system, displacing the logic of phallogocentrism, while
remaining within its terminology. Butler imagines Irigaray's thought
process here:
#+BEGIN_QUOTE
I will not be a poor copy in your system, but I will resemble you
nevertheless by miming the textual passages through which you
construct your system and showing that what cannot enter it is already
inside it (as its necessary outside), and I will mime and repeat the
gestures of your operation until this emergence of the outside within
the system calls into question its systematic closure and its
pretension to be self-grounding" (/Bodies/ 18).
#+END_QUOTE
Through repetition, deception emerges from resemblance, and
insubordination through subservience. The key is iteration, a
continual miming of the authorizing norm.

In what follows, I examine how iteration also emerges in the Python
programming language as it is used for text analysis tasks. Here, I
will deconstruct the cleaning and analysis processes to surface the
ways that Python's syntax evokes this quality of iteration.

The Python programming language offers a number of custom librarries,
suchas the Natural Language ToolKit (NLTK), for common text analysis
tasks that clean, count, and visualize textual patterns. Python
handles text data in the form of words, or ~strings~, contained within
groupings called lists. Then, Python goes through each item in the
list to perform a task. One way of going through lists is a consruct
known as the ~for loop~, which repeats a single action to each item,
each ~string~, within the list. At a very basic level, much of text
analysis consists of looping, or iterating, over bits of text and
performing actions to standardize the text for analysis. Such actions
include tokenizing, cleaning, and regularizing, which help to
eliminate pieces of text that will skew the results of analysis due to
their high frequency and low semantic value. Tokenizing the text means
separating the text into workable units, or ~tokens~, that are easier
to clean and regularize. Once the text is tokenized, it can be
stripped of capital letters, punctuation, and what are called "stop
words," which consist of prepositions, articles, pronouns, and
auxiliary verbs, which are deemed to be semantically minor compared to
nouns, verbs, and adjectives, and adverbs. The task of preprosessing
text forces words into existing boxes, so to speak, stripping text of
the significance portrayed by capitalized words, rhythms of language
in stop words, inflections in word endings, and so on. This reduction
of text is a necessary trade-off in order to reduce idiosyncracies and
to make meaningful computations on the text, making them amenable to
analysis.

The first step in cleaning usually involves removing things like
punctuation and capital letters. The following code block loops
through a text, saved here as ~full-text~, to filter out punctuation
and transform any capital letters into lowercase forms:

#+BEGIN_SOURCE python
normalized = []

for word in full-text:

    if word.isalpha():

        normalized.append(word.lower())

#+END_SOURCE

Here, the loop begins by creating an empty list, ~normalized~, where
words will be dropped after passing the filter. The next line begins
the ~for loop~, which iterates through each word in the ~full-text~
list of words. The third line, an ~if statement~ creates a Boolean (a
True or False) condition in which only alphabetic characters will pass
through (that is, characters which do not contain numbers or
punctuation). If the word fulfills this condition, then it passes to
the fourth line, which will add that word to the ~normalized~ list. At
the moment that this word is added to the list, its letters will be
transformed into lowercase format. The final list, therefore, will
only contain alphabetic and lowercased letters.

The next step is removing stop words. Here, we use another loop,
compressed into one line of code, in a syntax that is called a "list
comprehension."

#+BEGIN_SOURCE python
no-stops = [word for word in normalized if word not in stops]
#+END_SOURCE

This expression takes each word in a list, in this case, ~normalized~,
and checks to see if that word is also contained in ~stops~, a list of
stop words. If the word is /not/ a stop word, then it will be added to
a new list, ~no_stops~. Running the first sentence of /Orlando/
through the loop will return the following list of words:

#+BEGIN_SOURCE
['could', 'doubt', 'sex', 'though', 'fashion', 'time', 'something',
'disguise', 'act', 'slicing','head', 'moor', 'swung', 'rafters']
#+END_SOURCE

The next (and final) step of cleaning involves stripping word
inflections to get the root. Here, there are two possibile choices,
which differ in how much computational processing each requires. The
first one, called "stemming", simply cuts the endings from the
word. For example, "rafters" will be stripped to "rafter."  What this
method gains in speed, however, it loses in precision, and can
sometimes cut letters that are intrinsic to the word. The other
possbility, called "lemmatizing," involves looking up each word, one
by one, in a dictionary to find its appropriate root. Below is the
code for lemmatizing the text:

#+BEGIN_SOURCE python
clean = [WordNetLemmatizer.lemmatize(word, word) for word in no-stops]
#+END_SOURCE

At this point, the text is ready for analysis. A good first step is to
begin with a target word, in this case, "woman." One useful function,
called ~concordance()~ returns the context, that is, the immediate
words surrounding, the target word. Below, the word "woman" is run
through a concordance of the words in /Orlando/:

#+BEGIN_SOURCE
alities which the old woman loved the more the mo

scarlet . For the old woman loved him . And the Q

les . The old bumboat woman , who was carrying he

h , whether boy 's or woman 's , for the loose tu

 boy it must be -- no woman could skate with such

eadth off . She was a woman . Orlando stared ; tr

 , until now ? An old woman , he answered , all s

 and some old country woman hacking at the ice in

and pity the poor old woman who had no such natur

man 's beard and that woman 's skin ; of a rat th

 the sight of the old woman hobbling over the ice

ght coming or the old woman or whatever it was , 

tainly not those of a woman bred in a cattle-shed

e world for a Cossack woman and a waste of snow -

erating . There was a woman in white laid upon a 
#+END_SOURCE

Based off the contexts surrounding the target word, Python can make
further analyses. Another method, called ~similar()~ returns a list of
words used in similar contexts to the target word. To compute the
results of ~similar()~, NLTK first takes the context of the target
word from ~concordance()~, then it searches the text for other terms
which contain the same surrounding words. The result for running
~similar~ on the word "woman" is the following:

#+BEGIN_SOURCE
man moment night boy word world child pen ship door one room window
light little lady table book queen king
#+END_SOURCE

By searching the text for words that appear in similar contexts to the
chosen word, this method might reveal words that have semantic
resemblance to the target word. It is important to point out, however,
that the computer does not impute meaning to the words. Rather, it
only counts each word as a ~string~, that is, as a piece of data
composed of alphanumeric sequences. It takes "woman," then notes all
of the words in proximity to "woman," and then searches the rest of
the text for other words that have similar proximities.

Basic NLP tasks offered by libraries like NLTK contrast with "deep
learning" methods that work in more sophisticated ways to count and
analyze language. Many of these methods use "word embeddings" to
ascribe machine-interpretable meaning to strings. Like ~similar()~ and
~concordance()~, word embeddings build off patterns of word similarity
based on context. Unlike the NLTK methods, however, word embeddings
encode a value (actually, a list of values) to a given word based on
its context. The value of any given word is a numerical representation
known officially as a "word vector." A vector for a single word,
"woman," for example, will contain a list of numbers that represent a
similarity score between "woman" and another word. As numerical
representations, these values enable further quantitative exercises
that can analyze the relationship between "woman" and other words. The
classic example for introducing the potential of word vector math is
the formula, "King - Man + Woman = Queen" (Mikolev et al. 2). Here,
gender (between "Man" and "Woman") is isolated as a computable
component which enables one to derive the difference between "King"
and "Queen".[fn:10]

For example, the vector which represents "woman" contains a list of
numbers that score the similarity "woman" to other words. Here, the
word "woman" is most closely associated to the word "child," with a
similarity score, or "weight," of .93, or 93%, then with "mother,"
with .92, then "father," with .90.[fn:11] Below is a word vector of
words calculated to be most similar to "woman":

#+BEGIN_SOURCE
[('child', 0.9371739625930786),

 ('mother', 0.9214696884155273),

 ('whose', 0.9174973368644714),

 ('called', 0.9146499633789062),

 ('person', 0.9135538339614868),

 ('wife', 0.9088311195373535),

 ('being', 0.9037441611289978),

 ('father', 0.9028053283691406),

 ('guy', 0.9026350975036621),

 ('known', 0.8997253179550171)]

#+END_SOURCE

Commonly, word embeddings are organized into a matrix, or tabular,
format:

| Target Word | child | mother | whose | called | person | wife |... |
|-------+-----+-------+--------+-------+--------+--------+------+--- |
| Woman       | .937  | .921   | .917  | .915   |.914    |.909  |... |


Using this matrix format, further mathematical operations are possible
using statistics, linear algebra, and calculus, which are the building
blocks of deep learning methods. In deep learning, the labels
accompanying the numerical representations do not matter, only the
list of numbers themeslves, which together represent the word
vector. The word "woman," therefore, would be represented with the
following vector: .937. .921, .917, .915, .914, .909, and so on. This
representation demonstrates that, even when removing labels, words are
still assigned meaning by their relation, their proximity, to other
words. In the following section, I use these word vectors as a
starting point to explore terms related to each gender in /Orlando/,
starting with the terms "woman" and "man."

** Queer Distant Reading
I now turn to Virginia Woolf's novel, /Orlando: A Biography/. This
novel is ideal for a computational study of gender for two
reasons. First, published in 1928, it is perhaps the earliest salient
example of transgender narrative. Second, as many critics have noted,
its characterisitic modernist experimentation with limits of language
works toward destabilizing normative concepts of identity and
gender. Jane de Gay, Jill Channing, and Christy L. Burns, for example,
assert that Woolf deploys imaginative elements, magical realism, and
parody, respectively, to resist realist narrative expectations. De Gay
describes Woolf's writing as "feminist historiography" that "reject[s]
Victorian patriarchal metanarratives" and instead "use[s] the
strategies of fiction to bring history alive and make it live in the
present" (de Gay 71). In a similar vein, Burns and Channing both point
out that Woolf uses fantastical elements, in the former in the service
of parody, and the latter as part of magical realist writing, that
disrupt expectations of plot and narrative to challange the stability
of gender and identity. Doubling down on the role of langauge, some
critics emphasize that the narration purposefully obfuscates any
coherence between gender, identity, and even race and nationality. For
example, Victoria L. Smith asserts that "The fantastic content in the
novel is directly linked to the undecidability/impossibility of the
form of the novel and of the protagonist" (58). Pamela Caughie
analysis agrees, arguing that /Orlando/'s transgressiveness comes from
its discursive moves: "Far from defeating sexual difference, as many
feminist critics claim, Orlando enacts it, enshrines it, exploits it,
makes a spectacle of it, but as a playful oscillation not a stable
opposition" (Caughie 48).

In what follows, I pursue a text analysis method that I call
"iterative" for the way it moves between close and distant reading, a
process similar to what Andrew Piper calls "bifocal" reading. This
process, in Piper's words, "no longer us[es] our own judgments as
benchmarks... but explicitly construct[s] the context through which
something is seen as significant (and the means through which
significance is assessed)" (17). My method feeds the output of
computations into close reading analysis, using the computer to
identify words that I then examine in context and with detail.

First, I begin with a list of terms computed similar to woman and man
in the text. Unlike the word embedding of "woman," from my previous
section, the embeddings here are trained on Woolf's novel, and
therefore reflect an understanding of gender markers based on this
specific text. Additionally, to get distinctive results for each
gender, I modified the code to remove any words with strong
associations to the opposite gender. For example, I compute words that
are most positively associated with "woman" and most negatively
associated with "man." Though this analysis, like Underwood's, begins
with a binary formulation of gender, this binary quickly destabilizes
as I move deeper into the close reading analysis, more like Richard
Jean So and Edwin Roland's study of race. By /iterating/ through
distant and close reading, the terms swell with significations that
pluralize the binary and work toward resignifying the initial results
for "woman" and "man." Below are the word embeddings for the term
"woman" and "man," respectively.

#+BEGIN_SOURCE python
distinct_w = model.wv.most-similar(positive="woman", negative="man")

[('soft', 0.3692586421966553),

 ('named', 0.34212377667427063),

 ('sciatica', 0.3223450779914856),

 ('frilled', 0.3187992572784424),

 ('despaired', 0.31375786662101746),

 ('friend', 0.31238242983818054),

 ('delicious', 0.30853813886642456),

 ('winked', 0.30514153838157654),

 ('notion', 0.3047487139701843),

 ('seductiveness', 0.30290719866752625)]


distinct_m = model.wv.most-similar(positive="man", negative="woman")

[('chequered', 0.4025157392024994),

 ('fact', 0.3394489586353302),

 ('denounced', 0.3346075117588043),

 ('house', 0.33423593640327454),

 ('curiosity', 0.33144116401672363),

 ('defend', 0.3284823000431061),

 ('dancing', 0.3282632827758789),

 ('marbling', 0.3184848427772522),

 ('cynosure', 0.3057470917701721),

 ('rather', 0.3024100363254547)]

#+END_SOURCE

At first glance, the terms for each list appear to align with existing
conceptions of femininity and masculinity, such as "soft" and
"frilled" for "woman," and "fact" and "defend" for "man." But as I
examine these words in context, the gender binary becomes less clear
cut. From the "woman" list, I examine the term "delicious," which only
appears after Orlando has transitioned into a woman in the story. As I
explain below, this term reveals a relationship to queerness
characterized by what I describe as a distinctly feminine mode of
resistance. Then, from the "man" list, I examine a term that only
appears once in the novel, at a significant moment which initiates
what I call the novel's "crisis of signification" with
language. Following this thread, I examine further passages that
develop this theme as it spreads into Orlando's interior narration. I
conclude with a close reading of a rather dramatic passage that
contains words from both the "woman" and "man" lists, and constellates
this crisis with themes of gender ambiguity and homosexual desire.

I begin with the word "delicious," which occurs only after Orlando
transitions into a woman. Three of this term's five occurances appear
in a single passage, when Orlando is sailing from Turkey back to her
native England. The ship captain offers Orlando a bit of beef, which
sends her into a rapturous speculation about the joys of womanhood:
#+BEGIN_QUOTE
'A little of the fat, Ma'm?' he asked. 'Let me cut you just the
tiniest little slice the size of your fingernail.' At those words a
/delicious/ tremor ran through her frame. Birds sang; the torrents
rushed. It recalled the feeling of indescribable pleasure with which
she had first seen Sasha, hundreds of years ago. Then she had pursued,
now she fled. Which is the greater ecstasy? The man's or the woman's?
And are they not perhaps the same? No, she thought, this is the most
/delicious/ (thanking the Captain but refusing), to refuse, and see
him frown. Well, she would, if he wished it, have the very thinnest,
smallest shiver in the world. This was the most /delicious/ of all, to
yield and see him smile. 'For nothing,' she thought, regaining her
couch on deck, and continuing the argument, 'is more heavenly than to
resist and to yield; to yield and to resist. 114
#+END_QUOTE
Here, "delicious" describes a refusal, then a yielding--the
vacillations of what appears to be a passive form of pleasure,
ostensibly opposed to the active pleasure of pursuit which Orlando
enjoyed as a man. Below, I will return to this active kind of
pleasure, and the scene of its emergence when Orlando meets
Sasha. Here, although the word "delicious" describes a distinctly
feminine experience of pleasure, about withholding and, eventually,
submitting to the active force, it is a pleasure rooted in what is not
quite passivity and not quite power.

To get a deeper understanding of this term, I run another similarity
search with "delicious" as the target word. The top result, the word
most related to "delicious" in the text, is "culpable." I then turn
back to the text to examine when this word appears, which happens
twice, both times in the same scene on the ship, during Orlando's
ruminations about the pleasures between the sexes. Here is one of the
few times in the novel that Orlando considers her homosexuality
explicitly:
#+BEGIN_QUOTE
And as all Orlando's loves had been women, now, through the culpable
laggardry of the human frame to adapt itself to convention, though she
herself was a woman, it was still a woman she loved; and if the
consciousness of being of the same sex had any effect at all, it was
to quicken and deepen those feelings which she had had as a man. 119
#+END_QUOTE
"Culpable," from the Latin "culpa," meaning fault, denotes a body
deserving of blame for its refusal to conform. Here, the word modifies
"laggardry," which describes the obstinacy or persitancy of Orlando's
love for women, despite that she is now a woman herself. It seems
that, for Orlando, desire is defined by a sense of guilt about
refusing to conform. The next usage of this term occurs soon after,
when Orlando reprises her earlier thoughts around the time that
"delicious" appeared:
#+BEGIN_QUOTE
'To refuse and to yield,' she murmured, 'how delightful; to pursue and
conquer, how august; to perceive and to reason, how sublime.'  Not one
of these words so coupled together seemed to her wrong; nevertheless,
as the chalky cliffs loomed nearer, she felt culpable; dishonoured;
unchaste, which, for one who had never given the matter a thought, was
strange. 120
#+END_QUOTE
Rehearsing the conventional roles of the sexes, roles which Orlando
fails to fit into, she feels (in addition to "culpable)
"dishonour[ed]" and "unchaste"--words associated with an ideal of
virtuous femininity. This feminizing language deepens the relationship
between desire, guilt, and deliciousness, the last of which was
previously characterized as a distinctly feminine pleaure in passivity
that is not quite powerless. Here, Orlando's refusal to conform, for
which she feels culpable, constitutes another kind of passivity, a
form of refusal. The connection between "delicious" and "culpable,"
seem to define queer desire as a distinctly feminine mode of
resistance.

Now, I move to Orlando's experience as a man, returning to the
original list of similar terms. I begin with "chequered," which
appears only once, at the very beginning of the story, when Orlando
makes his entrance, stepping into "the yellow pools chequered by the
floor" (12). This moment is the first of many in which the narrator
calls into question his credibility as a biographer, a self-described
"scribe," who distinguishes his role from that of the poet that
embellishes and exagerrates through figurative language. However, the
narrator's committment to straightforward description soon gallops
into full-fledged figuration when he tries to describe Orlando's
beauty:
#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Directly we glance at Orlando standing by the window, we must admit
that he had eyes like drenched violets, so large that the water seemed
to have brimmed in them and widened them; and a brow like the swelling
of a marble dome pressed between the two blank medallions which were
his temples. Directly we glance at eyes and forehead, thus do we
rhapsodize. Directly we glance at eyes and forehead, we have to admit
a thousand disagreeables which it is the aim of every good biographer
to ignore. 12-13
#+END_QUOTE
Here, the narrator's evocative language undermines the pretense to
objectivity which he feels so compelled to produce a few lines above
this one. This slip into figurative language eventually grows into a
crisis of signification that recurrs persistently throught the novel.

The crisis even spreads to Orlando's internal thoughts, where it first
emerges during a period of depression following his love affair with
Sasha, a Russian princess. Here, I take the term, "despaired" which,
like "chequered," occurs only once in the novel:
#+BEGIN_QUOTE
So then he tried saying the grass is green and the sky is blue and so
to propitiate the austere spirit of poetry whom still, though at a
great distance, he could not help reverencing. 'The sky is blue,' he
said, 'the grass is green.' Looking up, he saw that, on the contrary,
the sky is like the veils which a thousand Madonnas have let fall from
their hair; and the grass fleets and darkens like a flight of girls
fleeing the embraces of hairy satyrs from enchanted woods. 'Upon my
word,' he said (for he had fallen into the bad habit of speaking
aloud), 'I don't see that one's more true than another. Both are
utterly false.' And he despaired of being able to solve the problem
of what poetry is and what truth is and fell into a deep
dejection. 75
#+END_QUOTE
Orlando, deep in depression, struggles to understand the role of
figuration in language. Much like the narrator in the previous
passage, Orlando also questions the truthfulness of figurative
elements. First, he attempts plain language, "the sky is blue", "the
grass is green," but these prove insufficient for describing a sky
that moves "like the veils which a thousand Madonnas have let fall
from their hair" and grass that "fleets and darkens like a flight of
girls fleeing the embraces of hairy satyrs from enchanted woods."
Orlando, who has just been abandoned by a woman, sees in nature flight
and modesty, qualities which he finds "false."

In a final example, I examine the co-occurance of words from both
lists within a single passage, the scene where Orlando meets
Sasha. The words, "curiosity," which is associated with "man," and
"seductiveness," which is associated with "woman," appear in a moment
of tumultuous desire about Sasha's gender incomprehensibility, where
gender becomes intimately coordinated to language's ability to
signify. The drama begins when Orlando, upon seeing Sasha for the
first time, cannot tell whether she is a man or a woman:
#+BEGIN_QUOTE
He beheld, coming from the pavilion of the Muscovite Embassy, a
figure, which, whether boy's or woman's, for the loose tunic and
trousers of the Russian fashion served to disguise the sex, filled him
with the highest /curiosity/. The person, whatever the name or sex,
was about middle height, very slenderly fashioned, and dressed
entirely in oyster-coloured velvet, trimmed with some unfamiliar
greenish-coloured fur. But these details were obscured by the
extraordinary /seductiveness/ which issued from the whole
person. Images, metaphors of the most extreme and extravagant twined
and twisted in his mind. He called her a melon, a pineapple, an olive
tree, an emerald, and a fox in the snow all in the space of three
seconds; he did not know whether he had heard her, tasted her, seen
her, or all three together. (For though we must pause not a moment in
the narrative we may here hastily note that all his images at this
time were simple in the extreme to match his senses and were mostly
taken from things he had liked the taste of as a boy. But if his
senses were simple they were at the same time extremely strong. To
pause therefore and seek the reasons of things is out of the
question)... A melon, an emerald, a fox in the snow--so he raved, so
he stared. When the boy, for alas, a boy it must be--no woman could
skate with such speed and vigour--swept almost on tiptoe past him,
Orlando was ready to tear his hair with vexation that the person was
of his own sex, and thus all embraces were out of the question. 27-28
#+END_QUOTE
The passage constellates the crisis of signification within the larger
issue gender ambiguity. Orlando uses seemnigly arbirary metaphors, "A
melon, an emerald, a fox in the snow," indicating that at the same
time which he cannot place Sasha's gender, he also cannot find the
right words to describe her. As Sasha's gender oscillates between male
and female throughout the passage, so the narrative voice alternates
between Orlando's interiority and the narrator's commentary. Taking
this crisis of signifcation to the level of deitic narrative, the
narrator's "pause" indexes the constructed nature of the scene. This
constructed quality is reinforced by the narrator's attempt to explain
Orlando's choice of words to describe Sasha, which have no "reason,"
and "were mostly taken from things he had liked the taste of as a
boy." Language, like gender, thus becomes a tool for representation
and performance. As Pamela Caughie, asserts, the gender transgression
is intimately connection to the narrator's experiments in figuration
and form: "Woolf brings out the arbitrariness of [sexual] identity,
the arbitrariness of language itself, through Orlando's switching from
one sex to the other, and from one poetic language to another, as well
as through the shifting of her own rhetoric in this novel (42). This
passage, with its "switching" and "shifting" discourse, which asserts
that word choices are arbitrary and flowing, implies that gender is
also a fluid phenomenon.

** Conclusion

The argument that /Orlando/'s subversiveness is a discursive one,
opens the text to numerous critiques[fn:12], particularly from Trans
Studies. According Jay Prosser, Woolf's experimentation with language
and narrative form belies the physical the embodied reality of
transsexuality. He argues that "Orlando is not about the sexed body at
all but the cultural vicissitudes of gender. As h/er narrative propels
h/er through four centuries of history, Orlando is free to move beyond
h/er body--quite queerly, to break through the limits of the flesh"
(Prosser 168). By "the sexed body," Prosser means the physical body
which is bound by the physical and social world. /Orlando's/'s
transgressiveness results from a play of language and literary form
that elides the specificity and the lived reality of the "sexed body."
Rather, due to its "ambivalence, a wavering around transition", "a
transformation of transition into new identity," its "easy androgyny,"
this text is transgender (Prosser 169).

A decade later, Omise'eke Natasha Tinsley writes about the problem of
gender fluidity as a metaphor. In her essay, "Black Atlantic, Queer
Atlantic: Queer Imaginings of the Middle Passage," Tinsley argues for
the imbrication of sexuality and race through the lense of the Black
Atlantic. By sexuality, Tinsley does not necessarily mean "same-sex"
desire, but relationships from the Middle Passage, that "mak[e]
disruption to the violence of the normative order... connecting in
ways that commodified flesh was never supposed to" (199). Reading for
relation rather than desire, her critique re-works the trope of
fluidity which, drawing from the ocean, "is not an easy metaphor or
queer and racially hybrid identities but for concrete, painful, /and/
liberatory experience" (192-193). For Tinsley, fluidity is an
opportunity for "a return to the materiality of water to make its
metaphors mean more complexly, shaking off settling into frozen
figures" (212). Reading from Dionne Brand's book, /Map to the Door of
No Return/ (2001), on the Middle Passage, Tinsley theorizes fluidity
as a "social liquidation," being stripped by the water, particulars of
identity washed away in the current. She explains that "brown bodies
are gender fluid not because they choose parodic proliferations but
because they have been 'washed of all this lading, bag and baggage'"
(209).

Tinsley's critique surfaces the ways that gender fluidity, as a trope
for queerness, obscures the very physical connotation of
corrosion. While this chapter, following Butler, has proposed
iterativity, which is a form of fluidity, as a kind of enabling
constraint that creates a possibility for resistance, I wonder how
Tinsley's evocation of materiality might deepen this analysis, opening
the potential of Queer Studies-inflected frameworks for text
analysis. One might think more deeply about the concept of iteration
and its connection to the productive power of language, the ways that
language physically executes action, for example, in computer
code. Python differs from other languages (like markup languages HTML
and XML, which I explore in the next chapter) in that it is an
executable language. The code not only defines instructions, but also
enacts them. How might this active quality of Python programming
influence the way that we study gender as an active, embodied
phenomenon?

* Footnotes

[fn:1] Text analysis borrows from Natural Language Processing and
Machine Learning methods to do analyses like Topic Modeling, Sentiment
Analysis, and Logistic Regression (discussed below). Though these
methods differ in important ways, they share in basic tasks of
counting and classifying words and other textual elements with the
goal of predicting and visualizing patterns in text.

[fn:2] In the wake of the #metoo movement in 2017, three graduate
students accused Moretti of harassment and assault. Stanford
university claimed to be reviewing the case with no formal proceedings
or other action being taken. See Liu, Fangzhou and Hannah Knowles.

[fn:3] For a more thorough critique of Da's aims and methodology in
this article, please see Ben Schmidt's "A computational critique of a
computational critique of computational critique,"

[fn:4] In his book /Reading Machines/, Ramsay draws from the
deformative critical methods of Jerome McGann and Lisa Samuels to
harness the enabling constraints of computation that "unleash the
potentialities" of the text, offering opportunities for new readings
(33).

[fn:5] In their introduction to /The Journal for Cultural
Analytics/'s "Identity Issue," Brown and Mandell situate feminist
debates around identity politics as a necessary context for
understanding how computational processes engage gender identity.

[fn:6] In /Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity/
(1990), Judith Butler famously disrupts two essentialist views of sex
and gender in contemporary feminist thought: first, that sex is
biological while gender is constructed; and second, the gender, as a
construction, is a self-expression of the subject. According to
Butler, there is no such thing as a subject that exists prior to
gender expression, as a subject only comes into being by participating
in a gender norm.

[fn:7] Common critiques of Butler point out the limits of this theory
for posing gender and sexuality as discursive. From the field of Trans
Studies, Jay Prosser problematizes Butler's "deliteralization of sex,"
a critique that he applies to Queer Studies more generally. Prosser
explains that because Butler's analysis attends to performativity as a
discursive phenomenon, it elides the real-world concerns of the body's
materiality. Prosser offers the example of Butler's reading of /Paris
Is Burning/'s Venus Xtravaganza who, Butler argues, occupies a space
of transgression due to her inability to attain her sex
change. According to Butler, a sex change that would "make [her]self
complete" would also fulfill the desire for a masculine body would
reinscribe heterosexual hegemony (45). Prosser points out that this
reading fails to reckon with the material body and its precarious
existence, as Venus's death illustrates (55). Butler's
"metaphorization of the transgender body" demonstrates one crucial way
that Queer Theory has subsumed, without fully accounting for,
transgressive desires in cross-gendered identifications.

[fn:8] Irigaray here critiques Jacques Derrida famously defines as
"phallogocentrism," the idea that man, symbolized by the phallus, is
the center and focus of knowledge.

[fn:9] Irigaray's concept of the "necessary outside" seems to
anticipate another popular critique of Butler's theory, from the field
of Political Philsophy, which claims a logical inconsistency in
Butler's theorization of subjectivity. If the resistance to
signification comes from outside the cycle of signification, does this
not imply a pre-discursive identity or at least desire for resistance?
Geoff Boucher writes that Butler locates the potential for subversion
"in a disembodied intentionality that appears to stand outside of the
culturally-scripted subject positions that the individual occupies"
(115).

[fn:10] It almost goes without saying--the formula reproduces gender
as a binary structure, where "Queen" is computed through its relation
to "King" and "Man."

[fn:11] The language model for this computation comes from Word2Vec's
"glove-twitter-25" dataset, which is based on Twitter data.

[fn:12] Jamie Hovey and Jessica Berman both explore how the text
challenges the boundaries of national identity through an implicit
critique of imperialism, a critique that emerges from the privileged
position of the white, British persective. Hovey remarks that
/Orlando/ is "an ambivalent articulation of English nationalism," a
nationalism that intersects with (and depends on) gender and race
(Hovey 394). Displacing the oppressive effects of nationalism to
racialized and sexually transgresive subjects, the novel "allows the
protagonist to pass as respectible and heterosexual" (Hovey
398). Bringing the question of transsexuality to the fore, Berman
argue that as a "trans text," /Orlando/ utilizes methods of marking
and categorizing bodies to interrogate the structures and boundaries
of nationality (Berman 218). According to Berman, "The transnational
situation as also intrinsically transgender" (Berman 218). Berman's
account harps on "the disruptive, critical energy of the prefix
'trans'" to unpack the concept of "nation" and "nationality" (Berman
220).

