* two

** "Encoding Queer Erasure in Oscar Wilde's..."

Literary scholars generally agree that the aestheticism of Oscar
Wilde’s novel, /The Picture of Dorian Gray/ (1891) classifies it as a
proto-modernist text. At the same time, textual scholars have long
speculated over the role of aesthetics as Wilde wrote and revised the
text, particularly in the manuscript version (/MS/. Among the various
changes to /MS/, Wilde suppressed suggestions of homoerotic overtones
in the relationship between the three main characters: the painter
Basil Hallward, his subject Dorian Gray, and their friend, Lord Henry
Wotton. Scholars generally agree that the revision of homoerotic
elements were part of a larger project to emphasize Dorian as an
aesthetic rather than erotic object in the story, as part of a larger
project of "modernizing" the text.

This project examines in detail Wilde's revisions to the manuscript's
homoerotic elements by using a digital tool that allows researchers to
mark and describe each change in the manuscript. I follow an
electronic editing standard, the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) to
encode or "mark up" the changes that Wilde imposed on the first
chapter of this text. Text encoding with TEI (explained further below)
allows researchers to isolate and describe in detail various features
of text, in this case, the deletions and additions that Wilde made on
his manuscript. In marking these changes, I draw from debates in Queer
Studies about Queer Historiography, which informs my approach of
handling of the homoerotic subject matter in digital contexts. I find
that debates in Textual Scholarship and Queer Historiography similarly
emphasize the relation between the critic and the object of study. My
inquiry draws out the parallel debate, which center on whether
scholarship ought to restore or "rescue" objects from the past, or if
there are other kinds of relationship between critic and text.

I end with proposing a method for marking Wilde's alterations and
deletions in TEI formal language. My customization of the TEI probes
whether this tool is "queerable," in the words of TEI and Literary
Scholar Julia Flanders. Flanders question, /do we need to queer markup
or is markup already queerable?/ follows from two approaches to "Queer
DH". First, the approach that wants to disrupt formal systems by
imagining alternative ones (such as that outlined in Fiona Barnett et
al's "Queer OS: A User's Manual");[fn:14] and second, the approach in
which queerness is built into computing, is inherent in computational
logic (championed by Jacob Gaboury).[fn:15] My examination of the TEI
explores TEI as a as a tool of containment--which literally encloses
textual elements in "tags"--for queer elements. I examine how
queerness works within and through this quality of containment. 

** textual scholarship
*** history of textual scholarship
Before proceeding with the content of Wilde's manuscript, I will give
a general overview of editorial approaches in the field of Textual
Scholarship. Textual Scholarship is a generalized term that describes
the studying, annotating, and editing of textual materials like
manuscripts and books. Within this field, the branch of Textual
Criticism focuses specifically on identifying and analyzing variants
of manuscripts and books. Textual Critics often examine textual
variants in order to select an ideal witness to form the basis of a
Critical Edition.

The project of selecting an "ideal" witness creates some controversy
about the proper role and purview of the textual critic. Dominant
editorial practices increasingly delimit the purpose and purview of
the editor as a recoverer or preserver of texts, while other
perspectives permit the authority of the editor as an enabler of
textual readings. The history of Textual Criticism thus presents an
arc, which first tends toward what I call the "restorative approach"
then, with the advent of digital technology, the "productive
approach." With the popularization of digital tools, editing becomes
less about "correcting" or aligning text with a prior witness, and
more about finding ways to multiply the text's potential forms and
readings. As I review the different approaches, I emphasize how the
/productive/ capacity functions within textual editing paradigm. I
will look to ways that editorial pracitices have opened up a space for
the editor's role as a content /creator/ rather than recoverer.

The "restorative approach" begins with the work of Ronald B. McKerrow,
a leading twentieth-century Shakespearean scholar, who maintains that
the goal of textual criticism to preserve authorial
intention. McKerrow proposes an influential model for "copy-text"
editing, which establishes the base text for editing (the "copy-text")
on an early witness that most closely resembles the author's original
intention. During the editorial process, the editor defers to this
early text in order to settle differences among variants.

Though highly influential, McKerrow's approach creates its own
resistance among textual scholars, who decry the "the tyranny of the
copy-text" that prevents them from drawing on other textual
variants. To address these concerns, Walter W. Greg's work, /The
Rationale of Copy-Text/ proposes that critics use the copy-text as a
basis for accidental elements like spelling and punctuation, while
expanding their purview of substantive elements to other witnesses
that may contain changes by the author.[fn:1] Fredson Bowers and
Thomas Tanselle advance Greg's work, further extending the importance
of authorial intention and encouraging editors to make careful and
deliberate choices about substantive elements the
"Greg-Bowers-Tanselle method." Their method favors the "eclectic
edition," which draws from multiple sources and depends heavily on the
editor's judgment to determine authorial intention in each
source. Tanselle, in particular, places much value in the editor who
is the only one able to recongize and manage inevitable textual
corruption. Tanselle describes the physical "text" as a vessel for the
ideal "work" that can only be realized by the editor:
#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Those who believe that they can analyze a literary work without
questioning the constitution of a particular written or oral text of
it are behaving as if the work were directly accessible on paper or in
sound waves... its medium is neither visual nor auditory. The medium
of literature is the words (whether already existent or newly created)
of a language; and arrangements of words according to the syntax of
some language (along with such aids to their interpretation as pauses
or punctuation) can exist in the mind, whether or not they are
reported by voice or in writing.[fn:2] Tanselle 16-17
#+END_QUOTE
Tanselle explains that act of inscription involves physical tools
(particularly language) that ultimately corrupt the pure ideas "in the
mind" of the writer. In order to realize the ideal form of her text,
the writer requires an editor who remains sufficiently distant from
the creation and transcription of the text to objectively intimate its
true intention. From this position, one might say that the text
closest to the author’s intention is the one scrupulously edited by a
textual scholar.

Toward the end of the 20th century, some textual critics take an
alternative perspective on the effect of inscription and tools on the
textual material. In particular, D.F. McKenzie, in his groundbreaking
work, /Bibliography and the Sociology of Texts/ (1999), asserts that
"Bibliography is the discipline that studies texts as recorded forms,
the processes of their transmission, including their production and
reception" (12-13). McKenzie's approach examines how the materiality
of texts, which include sound and electronic media, takes on new forms
and meanings in in their reprinting and reproduction. McKenzie traces
what he calls the "sociology" of texts by studying the social context
that produced each witness. He points out that "Every society rewrites
its past, every reader rewrites its texts, and if they have any
continuing life at all, at some point every printer redesigns them”
(25). According to McKenzie, the book is never a single object, but a
product of a number of human agencies and mechanical techniques that
are historically situated. As a result, no single witness, regardless
of scrupulous editing by the critic, can represent an "ideal" version.

Building off the ideas of McKenzie, Jerome McGann explores how
editorial practices might open up the ways that a text might be
interpreted.  McGann takes McKenzie's ideas about the "sociology of
text" and applies them to a digital editing environment, where
electronic media creates opportunities for presenting textual
variants. McGann explains that textual criticism in print format is
limited because it must conform to its object of study---to the linear
and two dimensional form of the codex. Thus, paper-based editions are
clunky and inadequate, and newer editions often “feed upon and develop
from [their] own blindness and incapacities” (McGann 2001, 81). By
contrast, digital editions can be designed for complex, reflexive, and
ongoing interactions between reader and text. Additionally, he points
out that changing one’s view of the original materials through the
process of building the edition calls its original purpose into
question: “[a]n edition is conceivable that might undertake as an
essential part of its work a regular and disciplined analysis and
critique of itself” (McGann 2001, 81). McGann notes that his work on
the digital /Rossetti Archive/ brought him to repeatedly reconsider
his earlier conception and goals, explaining that the archive "seemed
more and more an instrument for imagining what we didn’t know” (2001,
82).

*** toward Deformance

Jerome McGann's work as a eletronic textual editor explores ways that
the computer might effectively harness human attention. In digitizing
literary material, McGann takes the transformation of literary
material into electronic format as a vehicle for a critical analytial
method that he calls "deformative criticism." According to him and
Lisa Samuels, "deformance" works by estranging the reader from her
familiarity of the text that forces her to encounter it in a new
way. By continually subscribing the text to new configurations,
deformative criticism thus enables a volitality of potential readings.
McGann and Samuels give the example of reading a poem backward, where
“the critical and interpretive question is not 'What does the poem
mean?'  but 'How do we release or expose this poem’s possibilities for
meaning?'" (2001, 108). A "deformative criticism" therefore distorts,
disorders, or re-assembles literary texts to discover new insights
about its formal significance and meaning. For McGann, the technical
experience of editing electronic texts creates numerous potentialities
for interpreting text. A deformative approach to editing accesses what
McGann describes as a text's "quatum poetics." A text's "quantum
poetics" is the potential for meaning contained in each element of a
literary text. McGann explains that, “Aesthetic space is organized
like quantum space, where the ‘identity’ of the elements making up the
space are perceived to shift and change, even reverse themselves, when
measures of attention move across discrete quantum levels” (McGann
2001, 183). The meaning of particular words in a literary text depends
upon a multitude of factors, from antecedent readings through that
text, to the significance of immanent elements such as typography and
blank spaces, all of which the reader can only process a limited
amount. In its potentiality, McGann asserts, “Every page, even a blank
page... is n-dimensional” (2001, 184).


** Queer Historiography

There is a discouse in Queer Historicism that parallels the one I've
highlighted in Textual Scholarship. It centers on the potential for
critics in the present to adequately know what queerness was in the
past. On the one side, there is the "Queer Historicist" position,
advocated by scholars like David Halperin and Valerie Traub, who
maintain that homosexuality is historically constructed, that it means
something different today than it does in the past, and that we can
get at what it means by applying Michel Foucault's method of
genealogy, tracing the ways that discussions about sex and sexuality
over time have always been determined by power.[fn:16] On the other
side are the "unhistoricists," including Jonathan Goldberg, Madhavi
Menon, and Carla Freccero, who are wary of historiographical methods
that demarcate queer subjectivity across history in ways that are
teleological or imply progress.[fn:17] They maintain that although one
can not fully know what "queer" is or has meant, one may pursue a
method of /homohistory/, "with all its connotations of sameness,
similarity, proximity, and anachronism" (Goldberg, Menon
1609). Goldberg and Menon caution that historiographical methods that
attempt to pin down "queer" throughout history have the effect of
normalizing queerness: "to produce queerness as an object of our
scrutiny would mean the end of queering itself, a capitulation to
teleology" (1608).

In the middle of this debate about methodology, Heather Love refocuses
the question on the relationship between the critic and the object of
study. Love explains, "The turn from a focus on 'effective history' to
a focus on to a focus on 'affective history' has meant that critics
have stopped asking, 'Were there gay people in the past?' but rather
have focused on questions such as: 'Why do we care so much if there
were gay people in the past?' or even, perhaps, 'What relation with
these figures do we hope to cultivate'" (31). Love focuses the dark
side of queer history, asserting that "Queer history has been an
education in absence: the experience of social refusal and of the
denigration of homosexual love has taught us the lessons of solitude
and heartbreak" (52). Her methodology takes negative affects like
shame, anger, disgust, hatred, dissapointment as phenomena that cannot
be resolved, recuperated, or rescued. She offers the methodology of
"feeling backward," an accounting of "the social, psychic, and
corporeal effects of homophobia" (2). Love examines a series of
authors throughout the late 19th and early 20th century whose writing
is marked by "queer suffering," such as Radclyffe Hall, Willa Cather,
Walter Pater, and Sylvia Townsend Warner. These writers often create
queer subjects typified by their "backwardness," such as Stephen
Gordon from Radclyffe's /The Well of Loneliness/ (1928). Unlike
criticism that attempts to redeem such characters, re-framing their
histories of pain into narratives of perseverence or affirmation, Love
endeavors to give them full rein over their own darkness. For example,
in /The Well of Loneliness/ Love resists the labeling of Stephen
Gordon as a transgender ancestor. To do so would constitute another
act of historical rescue, and Stephen is “beyond the reach of such
redemptive narratives” (119). Love's reading attends, instead, to
Stephen’s loneliness as "a social experience insistently internalized
and corporeal" (108). The question, for Love, is not whether Stephen
is a pre-op Female-to-Male transgender subject, but whether and how
Stephen’s existential negativity can be confronted.

Love's method emphasizes queer modes of relationality that do not
presume full connections between the critic and subject of study. She
explains that "I want to suggest a mode of historiography that
recognizes the inevitability of a 'play of recognitions' but that also
sees these recognitions not as consoling but as shattering" (45). Love
seeks to identify with her subjects, she is interested in the way that
subjects turn away or refuse the critic's attempt to "redeem" or
"rescue" them. She gives the example of the myth of Orpheus and
Eurydice. Orpheus seeks to rescue Eurydice from Hades, the lord of the
Underworld, on the condition that he does not turn around to look back
at her until they exit the Underworld and re-emerge into the
sunlight. Unable to restrain himself, Orpheus turns back to gaze at
Eurydice just as they are about to pass through the threshhold. He
manages to catch a glimpse of his lover, but she is already turning
away, into the interminable darkness where she will be forever
imprisoned. Love points out that Orpheus turns back not because he
cannot wait any longer to behold his beloved, rather that he /prefers/
to behold her in her darkness, in the image of loss. This is a crucial
lesson for queer critics, as it informs the root of the desire for
identification. Love explains:
#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Anyone, I want to insist, might be seduced by the figure of Eurydice:
she is radiant in her withdrawal. But her specific attraction for
queer subjects is an effect, I want to argue, of a historical
experience of love as bound up with loss. To recognize Eurydice as
desirable in her turn away is a way of identifying through that
loss. Such an approach would be consistent with an important aspect of
contemporary queer politics, which has tended to define community not
as constituted by a shared set of traits, but rather as emerging from
a shared expereince of social violence. 51
#+END_QUOTE
Because queer history is what Love describes as "an education in
absence," queer critics and historians are predisposed toward
figurations of solitude and heartbreak (52). Eurydice represents the
image of "love as bound up with loss." Bringing her into the light of
day would transform her into something else, something less
desirable. 

In both queer historiography and textual scholarship (and indeed
across various fields), there is a central concern with what to do
with the materials from the past. The impulse that Love describes of
the queer theorist to "rescue" queer figures from the past is similar
to that of textual scholars like Tanselle who wants to "recover" the
ideal texts of the past. But this rescue is impossible, as Love
explains:
#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Such is the relation of the queer historian to the past: we cannot
help wanting to save the figures from the past, but this mission is
doomed to fail. In part, this is because the dead are gone for good;
in part, because the queer past is even more remote, more deeply
marked by power's claw; and in part because this rescue is an
emotional rescue, and in that sense, we are sure to botch
it. But... not to botch it would be a betrayal. Such a rescue effort
can only take place under the shadow of loss and in the name of loss;
success would constitute failure. 51
#+END_QUOTE
Taking this impossibilty as inspiration, one might rethink what to do
with, or how to access or preserve, our queer historical
inheritance. Love shows one way out by attending to the historical
record without attempting to redeem or rescue it. Her way is to pay
attention to the negative and elusive affects without trying to
convert or transform them to something more intelligible or palatable.

This is a lesson for how one might approach using TEI within a Queer
Studies context. One might use to mark up in a way that avoids
demarcating queerness. Taking Love's position as a guide, we might
proceed by knowing that success is impossible, that there will always
be something that eludes containment. This knowledge, rather than
discourage analysis, would encourage the critic to search for and
plumb the ways that queerness continues to escape our grasp.


** Oscar Wilde's changes to Dorian Gray
*** overview
This section examines the revision history of Oscar Wilde’s manuscript
of /The Picture of Dorian Gray/ to trace Wilde's treatment of the
story’s homosexual themes. I focus my examination on one textual
witness, Wilde’s manuscript held at the Pierpont Morgan Library
(/MS/), which he later revised into the 1890 version of the story in
/Lippincott’s Monthly Magazine/ (/DG90/), and later, into the 1891
print version, published by Ward, Lock & Company (/DG91/).[fn:3] In
examining the manuscript, I isolate the additions, deletions, and
alterations that Wilde imposed the first two chapters of the story. My
goal is to reveal the ways in which Wilde obscured homosexual and
homoerotic content, and to compare my findings with the conclusions of
prominent textual scholars on /Dorian Gray/.

The bulk of this paper engages in a close examination of the changes
to the first and second chapters of /MS/. I limit my focus to these
chapters for two reasons: first, they lay out the dynamics between the
central characters—-Basil Hallward, Lord Henry and Dorian Gray;
second, compared to other chapters, they are heavily revised and
present a rich resource for analysis. In examining the additions,
deletions, and alterations of the manuscript, I also consider some of
the revisions that Wilde made for the published versions of the story,
/DG90/ and /DG91/. My examination culminates by looking closely at a
passge from the first chapter that was altered at each stage of the
composition and revision process. Here, I consider how Wilde’s
continual work on this passage crystallizes his revisionary project.

Ultimately, I find that Wilde codes or otherwise obscures references
to homosexuality and homoeroticism in several interrelated
ways. First, he conceals the deep intimacy and sense of trust that
originally permeates the dynamic between Basil and Lord Henry. Second,
he alters the nature of Basil’s devotion to Dorian, diminishing its
intensity and removing hints about its fatality. These revisions work
together to reframe Dorian’s character as an aesthetic (rather than
erotic) object. This section then ends by engaging my findings with
the analysis of prominent Wildean textual scholars and editors,
particularly Donald L. Lawler and Nicolas Ruddick. [AND WHAT IS THE
ULTIMATE CONCLUSION ABOUT THE SCHOLARSHIP]

Before going into the revisions themselves, I will briefly review
Wilde’s composition and revision history over two years, from the
summer of 1889, when the story was first solicited from Wilde by the
editor of /Lippincott’s Monthly Magazine/, to the spring of 1891, when
it was finally published in book form by Ward, Lock, and Company.

*** revision context

As far as scholars know, the history of Dorian Gray begins with a
dinner on August 30th, 1889 between John Marshall Stoddart, an
American publisher from J.B. Lippincott Company in Philadelphia, the
British author Arthur Conan Doyle, and Wilde. The outcome of the
dinner is reported by Doyle in his memoirs: "both Wilde and I promised
to write books for 'Lippincott’s Magazine'" (Rpt. Lawler 7). A few
months later, Wilde writes to Stoddart in response to his rejection of
Wilde's submission, a fairy tale entitled "The Fisherman and His
Soul". In this letter, Wilde promises Stoddart "a new story which is
better than 'The Fisherman and His Soul,'" on which he "quite ready to
set to work" (Rpt. Lawler 8). Presumably, Wilde drafts this new story
until April or May of 1890, when it is typed and revised before being
mailed to Stoddart’s offices in Philadelphia. The surviving manuscript
and typescript indicate that Wilde revised his work multiple times
throughout composing and transcribing. Joseph Bristow, the editor of
/The Variorum Edition of/ Dorian Gray, remarks that "it remains
obvious from the manuscript and the typescript that the
author... worked with immense care and forethought in preparing his
work for Stoddart" (xxxv). 

In the spring of 1890, Wilde sends the typescript to Stoddart. After
excising some 500 words from the typescript, Stoddart publishes the
story on June 20, 1890.[fn:4] This initial version of "The Picture of
Dorian Gray" runs just over 50,000 words, spanning 98 pages over 13
chapters, and was released simultaneously in Philadelphia and London
on June 20, 1890. In England, the story was widely popular and
reviewed by the press, many of the prominent newspapers criticized the
it's ambiguous stance on a clearly immoral protagonist. Bristow
explains that "[Wilde’s] narrative struck the ostensibly liberal
/Daily Chronicle/, the high Tory /St James Gazette/, and the staunchly
imperialist /Scots Observer/ as a work that appeared 'corrupt',
displayed 'effeminate frivolity', and dealt 'with matters only fitted
for the Criminal Investigation Department'" (xviii). Wilde would spend
the next several days defending his work in letters to the editors,
entering into a public correspondence with them.[fn:5]

A few months later, in the early spring of 1891, Wilde publishes a
"Preface" to "The Picture of Dorian Gray" in /The Fortnightly
Review/. This "Preface," which will be included in the 1891 book
version of the story, consists of a series of witty epigrams and
aphorisms about the relationship between art and morality. According
to scholar Barbara Leckie, the "Preface" responds directly to the
suppressive climate that surrounds the Lippincott’s publication:
“Wilde advances an art-for-art’s sake position that attempts to remove
the novel from the debate by severing the connection between art and
society and, despite other statements to the contrary, denying the
moral force of literature” (171). In a list of concise aphorisms, the
"Preface" makes claims such as, "Those who find ugly meanings in
beautiful things are corrupt without being charming. This is a fault"
and "To reveal art and conceal the artist is art’s aim" (Gillespie
3-4). By these complex and incisive statements, Leckie maintains that
"Wilde's strategy is to refocus on art and disparage the focus on the
reader by saying that the reader is the one who makes a work immoral"
(173). Similarly, Lawler argues that "the 'Preface' relates to the
novel only obliquely by subverting the standards of Philistine art
criticism and holding up aesthetic beauty and artistic effect as the
only legitimate criteria of critical evaluation" (16). Though Wilde
may have seen the "Preface" as an opportunity to indict those readers
who would impose a moral judgement on Dorian, as indeed many of his
critics had done, the "Preface" actually obscures this message by
burying it in paradox and contradictions. The effect would be to
confuse and distract some readers from realizing that they were the
objects of Wilde’s critique. Nicolas Ruddick points out that "the
obvious contradiction between the retained episode of the poisonous
yellow book and the prefatory aphorism beginning 'There is no such
thing as a moral or immoral book' would be offered as one of the
delicious paradoxes that might bother only the small-minded"
(131).

Wilde subsequently worked on revising the Lippincott’s version of the
story for publication by Ward, Lock & Company in April 1891. This new
edition, containing 78,000 words, or 337 pages over 20 chapters,
including the "Preface." To the original chapters, Wilde added six
chapters to "broaden the social canvas of [his] story by accentuating
the double life that Dorian Gray leads in the contrasting worlds of
upper-class Society, on the one hand, and drug-addicted dissipation,
on the other hand" (Bristow liv). Wilde also continued his revisions
from the manuscript and typescript, deleting and altering passages
that express moments of intimacy and romantic passion between the
characters. According to Frankel, significant deletions include
passages with explicit homosexual references, promiscuous or illicit
heterosexuality, and "anything that smacked generally of decadence"
(47-48). Wilde also revised the ending of the novel in order to
resolve the ambiguity about Dorian’s apparent repentance: for the 1891
edition, Wilde "heighten[ed] Dorian’s monstrosity toward the novel’s
conclusion, making clearer the suggestion that Dorian’s destruction of
the portrait was only an attempt to destroy 'the evidence' against
him" (Frankel 30). In this way, Frankel argues, Wilde aimed to bring
"the novel to a moral conclusion that he thought would silence his
critics" (30).

*** changes to the first chapter

Now I will review how Wilde revised the first chapter. The evocative
opening scene, which consists of a lively dialogue between Basil
Hallward and Lord Henry, sets the tone, reveals character dynamics,
and lays out the conflict for the ensuing story. In these first few
pages, Basil comes across as a sympathetic, sensitive, albeit slightly
exasperated artist, who confides to his close friend the powerful
influence that Dorian Gray has had upon his life and work. Lord Henry,
by contrast, appears as an affable and witty gentleman aesthete, who
counters Basil’s confessional utterances with offbeat aphorisms and
paradoxes. Many of the revisions in these pages focus on Basil’s
hesitance and difficulty in explaining the nature of his devotion to
Dorian. Throughout these revisions, the figure of Dorian is
reformulated into an artistic subject, rather than romantic object,
for Basil’s painting. Additionally, the revisions also work to stifle
the emotional intensity, affection, and intimacy in the dialogue
between Basil and Lord Henry, replacing it with a lighter tone.

I will begin with the revisions that suppress suggestions of intimacy
between Basil and Lord Henry. In the manuscript, Wilde’s pen slashes
through evidence of physical contact, such as on page nine, which
describes Basil “taking hold of [Lord Henry’s] hand.”[fn:6] Besides
removing evidence of their touching, Wilde also alters the mood of
their conversation, replacing tense pauses with laughter or exchanging
dramatic statements and descriptions with more playful ones. Two
particularly striking moments will serve as examples, both of which
depict Basil’s struggle to convey why he cannot exhibit Dorian’s
portrait. In the first example, Lord Henry encourages Basil to explain
his hesitation. Prior to any revisions, the dialogue in the manuscript
reads:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
“Lord Henry hesitated for a moment. ‘And what is that?’ he asked, in a
low voice. ‘I will tell you,’ said Hallward, and a look of pain came
over his face. ‘Don’t if you would rather not,’ murmured his
companion, looking at him” (MS 9). 

The revised version in the manuscript, incorporating the deletions and
interlinear additions, reads: 

#+BEGIN_QUOTE 
“Lord Henry laughed. ‘And what is that?’  he asked. ‘I will tell you,’
said Hallward, and an expression of perplexity came over his face. ‘I
am all expectation Basil,’ murmured his companion, looking at him” (MS
9).
#+END_QUOTE

Here, several changes mitigate the emotions of the scene. First,
rather than hesitate, Lord Henry laughs, and he no longer speaks “in a
low voice”: the effect is to overwrite a previously intimate moment
with joviality. Basil also exchanges his emotional misery for mental
confusion when “a look of pain” becomes “an expression of
perplexity”. And lastly, Lord Henry, rather than sympathizing with his
friend’s difficulty and releasing him from the obligation to explain
himself, instead encourages him to speak, “I am all expectation,
Basil”. Together, these changes work to lighten the mood of the scene
and obscure Basil’s internal suffering.[fn:7]

A second revision that similarly tempers the scene’s emotional energy
occurs on the next page, when Basil is on the verge of revealing the
reasons behind his attraction for Dorian. The original dialogue
proceeds:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
“Lord Henry felt as if he could hear Basil Hallward’s heart beating,
and he heard his own breath, with a sense almost of fear. ‘Yes. There
is very little to tell you,’ whispered Hallward, ‘and I am afraid you
will be disappointed. Two months ago...’” (MS 10).
#+END_QUOTE

The manuscript’s revised version reads: 

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
“Lord Henry felt as if he could hear Basil Hallward’s heart beating,
and he wondered what was coming. ‘Yes. There is very little to tell
you,’ whispered Hallward rather bitterly, ‘and I dare say you will be
disappointed. Two months ago...’” (MS 10).
#+END_QUOTE

Here, rather than draw attention to Lord Henry’s breathing, Wilde
mentions Lord Henry’s “wonder” about Basil’s pending explanation,
shifting Lord Henry’s sense of anticipation from fear to curiosity. He
also makes slight changes to Basil’s delivery: in the revised version,
Basil speaks “rather bitterly” and uses the expression “I dare say”
rather than “I am afraid”. Both changes diminish the confessional tone
that originally precedes Basil’s revelation about Dorian Gray.[fn:8]

In addition to allaying the emotional intensity in the dialogue
between Basil and Lord Henry, Wilde also removes suggestions of
jealousy between them. At the end of the first chapter, Basil implores
Lord Henry in vague terms to abstain with regard to Dorian. The
original version reads:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
‘Don’t take away from me the one person that makes life lovely for
me. Mind, Harry, I trust you.’ He spoke very slowly, and the words
seemed wrung out of him, almost against his will.

‘I don’t suppose I shall care for him, and I am quite sure he won’t
care for me,’ replied Lord Henry smiling, and he took Hallward by the
arm, and almost led him into the house. (MS 27, 27B, 28)
#+END_QUOTE

In this dialogue, the meaning of Basil’s request—-“Don’t take [Dorian]
away from me”—-reveals itself in Lord Henry’s assurance that neither
he nor Dorian shall “care for” each other, suggesting that Basil’s
anxiety is about maintaining Dorian’s affection. This response
characterizes Basil’s possessiveness over Dorian as a jealous
one. However, the source of Basil’s anxiety changes with the next
revision, where Wilde gives him more lines of explanation and
accordingly alters Lord Henry’s response. The revision thus proceeds:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
‘Don’t take away from me the one person that makes life absolutely
lovely to me, and that gives my art whatever wonder or charm it
possesses. Mind. Harry, I trust you.’ He spoke very slowly, and the
words seemed wrung out of him almost against his will.

‘What nonsense you talk,’ said Lord Henry smiling, and, taking
Hallward by the arm, he almost led him to the house. (MS 27, 27B)
#+END_QUOTE

In this revision, Basil attributes an aesthetic value to Dorian. Here,
Basil asserts Dorian’s importance for his art, giving it “whatever
wonder or charm it possesses.” And Lord Henry’s response, completely
altered from his original attempts to reassure Basil, is instead
dismissive, rejecting Basil’s anxiety as “nonsense”, and ending the
scene on a slightly humorous note. By portraying Dorian as an artistic
subject and asserting Basil’s anxiety about losing that subject, Wilde
evacuates the jealous tension between the two men. And by transforming
Lord Henry’s emotional tone from reassurance to lighthearted repartee,
the interaction loses its sympathetic intimacy. The effect is to
remove the sense of jealousy between Basil and Lord Henry and replace
their mutual understanding with a friendly banter.[fn:9]

Often throughout this chapter, Wilde cuts through individual words and
replaces them with ones that are less precise and suggestive, or that
distract from the original meaning. He focuses this type of revision
on Basil’s dialogue, particularly when Basil speaks about his
attachment to Dorian, his beauty, and its effect upon his art. Here,
Wilde will trade expressive nouns with words that convey relatively
weaker or less specific descriptions, and the effect is always to
obscure or diminish the intensity of Basil’s attraction for
Dorian. For example, in the sentence “Every portrait that is painted
with passion is a portrait of the artist, not of the sitter”, Basil
replaces “passion” with “feeling” in the manuscript (MS 9), exchanging
the romantic connotation with a more general one.[fn:10]

Particularly interesting is Basil’s use of the word “Beauty” to refer
to Dorian. In his revisions, Wilde replace this term with ones that
appear to lessen Dorian’s mysterious appeal. In the sentence,
“Suddenly I found myself face to face with the young man whose beauty
had so stirred me”, Wilde replaces “beauty” with “personality” and he
adds the word “strangely” in superscript (MS 13). The revised sentence
therefore reads, “Suddenly I found myself face to face with the young
man whose personality had so strangely stirred me” (MS 13). The
replacement of “beauty” with “personality” allows Basil to completely
avoid mentioning Dorian’s physical appearance, and the addition of
“strangely” serves to mystify Dorian’s influence over
Basil. Throughout the chapter, Wilde makes several more revisions of
the word “beauty” when they relate directly to Dorian: on page six, he
replaces “Dorian Gray’s beauty” with “Dorian Gray’s good looks”; and
on page 18, he exchanges “the beauty of Dorian Gray” with “the face of
Dorian Gray”. Unlike the previous revision, where attention is
diverted from Dorian’s physical qualities, the decision here to
replace “beauty” with references to Dorian’s “face” or his “good
looks”, while maintaining the emphasis on the physical, also mutes the
suggestive power of “beauty” in the abstract. In doing so, it rids the
text from the connotations that generally accompany “Beauty,”
including the ideal, the charming, and the alluring, to instead convey
more particular and muted descriptions of body parts (the “face”) or
visual attractiveness (“good looks”). By redirecting the attention
from suggestive “Beauty” in the abstract and toward Dorian’s specific
attributes, these revisions evacuate his mysterious allure. In
diverting attention from the enigmatic implications of Dorian’s
beauty, they work with the previous revisions to diminish the
overwhelming influence that Dorian holds over Basil.

Wilde’s revisions also work to reduce Basil’s intense, consuming
devotion for Dorian and the resulting signs of his troubled state of
mind. First, Wilde takes out two of Basil’s references to a fatality
about his attachment to Dorian. The first occurs when Basil recounts
his first meeting with Dorian to Lord Henry. In the original version,
Basil admits: “I had a strange feeling that Fate had in store for me
exquisite joys and exquisite sorrows. I knew that if I spoke to him, I
would never leave him till either he or I were dead. I grew afraid,
and turned to quit the room” (MS 12). In the manuscript, Wilde crosses
through “never leave him till either he or I were dead” and adds, in
superscript, “become absolutely devoted to him, and that I ought not
to speak to him.” So, the revised line reads, “I knew that if I spoke
to him, I would become absolutely devoted to him, and that I ought not
to speak to him” (MS 12).  In removing the reference to Basil’s death,
wilde eliminates the self-consuming quality of Basil's
devotion.[fn:11] Wilde again revises a reference to Basil’s death a
few pages down, when he professes that “I could not live if I did not
see him every day” (MS 17). On the manuscript, Wilde changes the line
to read, “I couldn’t be happy if I didn’t see him every day” (MS
17). Replacing “live” with “be happy,” Wilde again avoids admitting
the extent to which Dorian has influenced Basil. Like the previous
revision, this one exchanges the question of life and death,
suggesting inevitability and doom, for one of emotional fulfillment.

Closer to the end of the first chapter, Wilde deletes an entire
passage describing the masochistic and jealous qualities of Basil’s
attachment. When explaining to Lord Henry the nature of his devotion,
Basil confesses:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE 
...I feel, Harry, that I have given away my whole soul to someone
seems to take a real delight in giving me pain. I seem quite adjusted
to it. I can imagine myself doing it. But not to him, not to him. Once
or twice we have been away together, then I have had him all to
myself. I am horribly jealous of him of course. I never let him talk
to me of the people he knows. I like to isolate him from the rest of
life, and to think that he absolutely belongs to me. He does not, I
know. But it gives me pleasure to think that he does, Harry! /MS/ 23
#+END_QUOTE

In the manuscript, Wilde crosses out everything after "a real delight
in giving me pain" upt to "But it gives me pleasure to think it does,
Harry!" In doing so, he removes suggestions of Basil’s complicity in
his suffering—-"I seem quite adjusted to it"-—and his dominating
jealousy—-"I never let him talk to me of the people he knows." By
withdrawing these lines, Wilde stifles the destructive connotations of
Basil’s devotion to Dorian.[fn:12]

*** one passage over three versions
My final example concerns a longer passage that was heavily revised in
the manuscript and book versions of the story. The development of this
passage over time crystallizes the various patterns of revision seen
so far—-removing signs of physical intimacy and jealousy, diminishing
tension in dialogue, and emphasizing Dorian as an aesthetic
object. The passage in the manuscript bears quoting in full. Prior to
any revisions, it proceeds:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE 
‘You remember that landscape of mine... It is one of the best things I
have ever done. And why is it so? Because, while I was painting it,
Dorian Gray sat beside me, and as he leaned across to look at it, his
cheek just brushed my cheek. The world becomes young to me when I hold
his hand, as when I ask him the [indecipherable].’

‘Basil, this is [indecipherable] you must not talk [indecipherable]
[indecipherable] his power, [indecipherable] to make yourself the
[indecipherable] slave! It is worse than wicked, it is silly. I hate
Dorian Gray.’

Hallward got up from the seat, and walked up and down the garden. A
curious smile curled his lips. He seemed like a man in a dream. After
some time he came back. ‘You don’t understand, Harry…’ he
said. ‘Dorian Gray is merely to me a motive in art. He is never more
present in my work then when no image of him is there. He is simply a
suggestion, as I have said, of a new manner. I see him in the curves
of certain lines, in the loveliness and subtleties of certain
colours. That is all.’

‘Then why won’t you exhibit his picture?’

‘Because I have put into it the romance of which I have never dared to
speak to him. He knows nothing about it, but the world
[indecipherable] guess it, where there is merely love, they would see
something evil, where there is spectacular passion, they would suggest
something vile.' /MS/ 20-21
#+END_QUOTE

Many of these lines are crossed out, some so heavily, that entire
phrases are undecipherable, as indicated by the tags. What remains
legible, however, suffices to draw some conclusions about Wilde’s
revision practice. In the first paragraph, the section from “and as he
leaned across” to the end of the paragraph is crossed out in a likely
attempt to remove evidence of physical intimacy (“his cheek just
brushed my cheek”) and suggestions of romance (“the world becomes
young to me when I hold his hand”). While some of this paragraph is
legible, the next one, by contrast, is almost completely blotted
out. From what I can gather, it consists mostly of Lord Henry’s
condemnatory and jealous protestations--"his power," "to make yourself
the... slave!" and "I hate Dorian Gray." In striking through these
lines, Wilde obscures Lord Henry’s exasperation about Basil succumbing
to Dorian’s charms. Most of the third paragraph eludes erasure, and is
preserved in the manuscript: here, Basil finally explains the precise
influence that Dorian has upon his art--as an ideal that inspires and
stimulates beauty in the natural world. In the final paragraph, Wilde
again obscures much of language, particularly this revelatory line:
"where there is merely love, they would see something evil, where
there is spectacular passion, they would suggest something vile." With
this admission, Basil’s meaning throughout the passage attains
clarity: Dorian Gray inspires a powerful, romantic attraction in Basil
that suffuses all of his work with beauty and wonder. This message,
however, is heavily obscured by the revisions on the manuscript, where
indications of physical intimacy, Lord Henry’s condemnation, and the
depth of Basil’s love and passion are removed. Despite Basil’s
difficulty and suffering, it appears that his attachment to Dorian has
positive, creative effects. The revisions in the manuscript, however,
begin to detach this creative effect from the passionate cause. 

Wilde again alters this passage for /DG91/. This time, he focuses on
portraying Dorian as an aesthetic subject by reframing the terms of
Basil’s devotion. In the following excerpt, all relevant additions are
written in italics and deletions are indicated with a strikethrough:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
‘You remember that landscape of mine, for which Agnew offered me such
a huge price, but which I would not part with? It is one of the best
things I have ever done. And why is it so? Because, while I was
painting, it, Dorian Gray sat beside me. Some subtle influence passed
from him to me, and for the first time in my life I saw in the plain
woodland the wonder I had always looked for, always missed.’

‘Basil, this is extraordinary! I must see Dorian Gray.’

Hallward got up from his seat, and walked up and down the garden.
After some time he came back. ‘You don’t understand, Harry,’ he
said. ‘Dorian Gray is merely to me a motive in art. You might see
nothing in him. I see everything in him. He is never more present in
my work than when no image of him is there. He is simply a suggestion,
as I have said, of a new manner. I find him in the curves of certain
lines, in the loveliness and the subtleties of certain colours. That
is all.

‘Then why won’t you exhibit his portrait?’ asked Lord Henry.

‘Because, without intending it, I have put into it all the
extraordinary romance some expression of all this curious artistic
idolatry, of which, of course, I have never cared to speak to him. He
knows nothing about it. He shall never know anything about it. But the
world might guess it; and I will not bear my soul to their shallow,
prying eyes.' Gillespie, 13-14, 193
#+END_QUOTE

Before turning to the revisions for the /DG91/ version, I will first
acknowledge a couple of significant changes from the manuscript that
have a bearing on the more recent ones. First, in deleting evidence of
physical intimacy, Wilde retains the line, “Dorian Gray sat beside
me”, maintaining the influence of Dorian’s physical presence on
Basil’s painting. Second, Wilde completely removes indications of Lord
Henry’s jealousy and disapproval; he now responds to Basil’s admission
with wonder and interest, “This is extraordinary! I must see Dorian
Gray.” The decision moves the attention from Lord Henry, and redirects
it to Basil and his explanation, to which Wilde adds significant
lines. The addition in the first paragraph—“Some subtle influence
passed from him to me, and for the first time in my life I saw in the
plain woodland the wonder I had always looked for, always
missed”—serves to concretize the nature Dorian’s influence with an
example, by which Basil explains how Dorian’s mere presence can affect
his art by permeating beauty. The addition in the third paragraph—“You
might see nothing in him. I see everything in him”—elevates Dorian to
the abstract. The possibility that Lord Henry might see nothing in
Dorian implies that Dorian’s influence is beyond the visible, and has
a spiritual significance. The additions in the final paragraph define
the nature Basil’s of worship expressed by the painting. Rather than
portray an “extraordinary romance,” the painting expresses a “curious
artistic idolatry”, which Basil betrays “without intending it”. The
revisions here reinforce Basil’s devotion as an aesthetic and
accidental one, a creative impulse beyond his control. They reframe
Dorian from a painter’s perspective, as an ideal object. Together, the
revisions work to fully sever the erotic from the aesthetic, which
were inseparable prior to revision in the manuscript.


*** debates on purpose of revisions
One of the questions this chapter poses is whether Wilde’s treatment
of homosexual and homoerotic themes during the revision of the
manuscript relates to the presentation of the story’s moral. Critics
generally agree that Wilde's revisions on the print version of the
story work to conceal what Bristow calls the "implicit moral," which
Wilde felt was too apparent in the periodical version (Bristow
xxxvii). Lawler, for example, argues that “The controlling purpose of
the author in revising his novel was to suppress the original moral so
that it would become subordinate to an aesthetic end" (22). In one of
his letters to the /St James Gazette/, Wilde divulges what he calls
the "moral" of the story: "all excess, as well as all renunciation,
brings its own punishment" ("To the Editor of the St James Gazette,"
June 26 1890). According to Lawler, the revisions therefore work to
make "the moral a dramatic element in the work of art and not the
object of the work of art itself” (20). For example, by solidifying
Dorian’s character as thoroughly corrupt, the story could then draw
the reader’s attention to its dramatic, rather than didactic,
effects. This paper questions how Wilde’s revisions in the manuscript
might also affect the presentation of the moral. In my conclusion, I
will open some possibilities for engaging Wilde’s revisionary practice
with the complex question of Wilde’s moral.

Might there be a possible connection between Wilde’s revision of the
homosexual content and the moral of the story? The textual scholarship
on /Dorian Gray/ generally agrees that Wilde’s aimed to silence a
moral that was too apparent, and there appears to be a similar motive
in his handling of the homosexual elements. Joseph Bristow argues that
Wilde aimed to obscure the moral from the story’s early stages, when
he was preparing it for publication in /Lippincott’s/: “In keeping
with the manuscript, in the typescript Wilde proved reluctant… to
preserve any statements that might lend unnecessary emphasis to what
might be viewed as the implicit moral of the tale’” (xxxvii). Bristow
draws from Donald Lawler’s extensive work on the story’s transmission
history, in which he argues that Wilde attempted to obscure the moral
in each round of revisions, from the manuscript to the book
version. In his book, /An Inquiry into Oscar Wilde's Revisions of the
Picture of Dorian Gray/, Lawler explains that “the dominant motive
underlying all of the important changes made by Wilde was an artistic
desire to suppress an underlying moral which Wilde considered to be
too obvious and, for that reason, distracting” (2). The solution,
according to Lawler, was for Wilde to transform the moral into a
dramatic element in the story. For example, by emphasizing Dorian’s
corruption, Wilde could “make that moral function as a dramatic
principle of character and action” (Lawler 23). Lawler demonstrates
how Wilde altered the ending of the story in order to settle the
ambiguity about Dorian’s sense of remorse. The new ending emphasizes
Dorian’s monstrosity by removing signs of a sincere repentance behind
his decision to destroy the portrait. In this way, the moral action
could serve a dramatic role. According to Lawler, this revision makes
the moral “subordinate to an aesthetic end” (22).

Lawler goes further, arguing that subordination of the moral to
aesthetic concerns extends to Wilde’s treatment of the homosexual
content in the story. He argues that Wilde cut and revised this type
of content for two reasons: first, to emphasize Dorian’s
responsibility over his own degeneration, and second, to improve the
quality of the writing. According to Lawler, “By Wilde’s shifting his
emphasis in the /Lippincott’s/ and in the Ward, Lock & Company /Dorian
Gray/ from homsexual passion to aesthetic interest, Basil’s
culpability is Dorian’s fall from grace is muffled and reduced finally
to that of the author of the detested painting” (26). The result of
the revision is that Dorian becomes responsible for his own
corruption, assuming the dramatic role as the fallen one. Lawler’s
second explanation behind Wilde’s revisions is more superficial. Here,
he argues that “in most cases the offensive passages shown above in
the notes were cut because of their mawkish and sentimental writing as
much for their affront to contemporary moral standards” (65). So, from
this view, the homosexual content was removed either to reduce Basil’s
complicity in Dorian’s corruption or for the sake of style.

Nicolas Ruddick offers another perspective on Wilde’s treatment of the
homosexual content as it relates to the moral. Examining the
differences between the /DG90/ and /DG91/, Ruddick argues that /DG90/
is the “aesthetically superior” text, because it does a better job
than /DG91/ maintaining a coherence between the story’s two
morals. According to Ruddick, while /DG90/ creates a disjunction
between the two morals—what he calls the “overt” and “covert”
parables, of the story—the revisions in DG91 fail to resolve this
flaw. The two parables concern the dangers of vanity and the
liberalization of homosexuality: while the overt parable “dramatize[s]
the disastrous consequences of the preference of the beautiful at the
expense of the good”, the covert parable, by contrast, “explores the
destructive effects of the clandestine or closeted life” (126,
128). Ruddick contends that Wilde, in /DG91/, “chose the route of
suppression,” reducing the homoerotic elements and including a preface
defending art from the moral judgements of the bourgeois critic
(133). Ruddick makes a fair point that, when read together, the two
parables appear to associate vanity and homosexuality with corruption:
“the appalling changes to Dorian’s painted image in /DG90/ strongly
suggest that the unspeakable practices indulged in by the protagonist
are unspeakable in themselves” (129). So, according to Ruddick,
Wilde’s later story emphasizes a moral that warns against the dangers
of vanity at the expense of one about the liberalization of
homosexuality.

Both Lawler and Ruddick argue that Wilde had to diminish the
homosexual elements in order to further develop and highlight the
moral of the story. Though Lawler asserts that the homosexual content
was removed to emphasize Dorian’s corruption and for stylistic
reasons, it seems that the revisions also work to remove the negative
connotations of Basil’s attachment: much of the original content in
the first chapter serves to emphasize Basil’s passion as a tortuous
struggle, and the revisions mitigate this passion and resultingly
present Dorian as an aesthetic object. In this way, the revisions
appear to lay the groundwork for severing Dorian’s corruption from the
homosexual or homoerotic and associating it more firmly with
vanity. This result also accords with Ruddick’s contention, that the
revisions emphasize a moral that warns against the dangers of vanity
at the expense of a moral about the liberalization of
homosexuality. It seems that, by tempering Basil’s passion and
aestheticizing Dorian, Wilde is able to remove the negative
consequences of passion and replace them with the ones of worshipping
beauty. However, while the earliest version of the story appears to
associate homosexuality and vanity with corruption, it also warns
against interpreting passion as a negative quality. Indeed, Basil
makes precisely this argument when he explains to Lord Henry his
reason for not exhibiting the portrait: “where there is merely love,
they would see something evil, where there is spectacular passion,
they would suggest something vile” (MS 21). This line, struck from the
manuscript, leaves one with the suspicion that Wilde may have silenced
the homosexual themes for the same reason that Basil could not exhibit
his portrait.

*** conclusion on revisions
Together, the changes between the different textual witnesses suggest
that Wilde had a deliberate purpose in revising the first chapter of
the story. It appears that the revisions work to obscure or diminish
the homosexual and homoerotic elements by turning Dorian into an
aesthetic object. They achieve this goal in three ways: first, by
removing the negative connotations of Basil’s attachment to Dorian,
particularly the consuming intensity of his devotion; second, by
easing the tension surrounding his dialogue with Lord Henry, sometimes
lightening the heavier moments with a touch of comedy; and finally, by
emphasizing Dorian as an ideal subject for art, expanding his appeal
from the romantic and the physical toward a spiritual influence that
inflects his surroundings. In these ways, the revisions turn something
troubling and potentially fatal into a celebration of ideal beauty.




** TEI
*** overview
TEI (short for Text Encoding Initiative) is a method for encoding, or
marking up, texts in such a way that humans and computers can make
sense of them. To those who are familiar with it, TEI resembles HTML
(HyperText Markup Language), and indeed, both descend from the parent
language, SGML (Standard Generalized Markup Language). Both are
"markup schemas," that is, annotation or other descriptive marks
within a text that describe how some content should be printed or laid
out. All texts are implicitly encoded (or marked up) in the sense of
punctuation, capitalization, disposition of letters around the page,
even the spaces between words. Both TEI and HTML use markup that
encloses textual elements to indicate information about those
elements. However, while HTML encodes how text should appear on a
webpage, in the form of titles, headings, paragraphs, or links, TEI
encodes the not just the structural or renditional aspects of text,
but also information about the text's content.

TEI consists of a set of guidelines that facilitates electronic
editing, digitization, and transcription. Maintained by the TEI
Consortium, the guidelines contains rules for using various "tags" to
mark up certain textual elements, such as ~<line>~ to indicate a line
of text, ~<del>~, to indicate deleted text (if the source document is
a manuscript, for example), and ~<person>~, for a reference to a
person. Here is an image of TEI text, in this case the manuscript from
Mary Shelley's /Frankenstein/, digitized and encoded by the
Shelley-Godwin Archive.

[[./sga_diplo.png]]

Here is an excerpt of some of the TEI code underlying this page. Note
that the first few lines of the text contained within the ~<line>~
tags:

#+BEGIN_SOURCE xml
    <handShift medium="pen" new="#mws"/>
    <line>Those events which materially influence our fu</line>
    <line>ture destinies 
    <del rend="strikethrough">are</del> often 
    <mod>
        <del rend="strikethrough">caused</del>
        <del rend="strikethrough">by slight or</del>
        <add hand="#pbs" place="superlinear">derive thier origin from
        a</add>
      </mod> tri
    </line>
    <line>vial occurence
    <del rend="strikethrough">s</del>. 
    <mod spanTo="#c56-0005.01"/>
    <del rend="strikethrough" next="#c56-0005.02">Strange as the</del>
#+END_SOURCE

When scholars might simply scan and upload images of text, why would
they to go through the trouble of marking up a text with TEI? One
reason is that TEI facilitates deep and complex description of textual
material. Once a text is marked up with TEI, the relevant elements can
be searched, processed, and rendered to facilitate scholarly
research. Often, this includes diplomatic transcription of manuscript
materials. For example, in the /Frankenstein/ project, the encoding
includes information about who is writing which portions of the text,
either Mary Shelley or her husband, Percy Shelley. The text is encoded
according to the "hand," indicated by the ~<handShift>~ tag and
~@hand~ attribute, of either Mary or Percy Shelley. Therefore, one can
see from the above example in line 8 that Percy Shelley makes the
following addition: "derive thier origin from a."

Besides encoding text for diplomatic transcription, one can also
encode text for content, such as references to persons or places. For
example, /The Willa Cather Archive/, a digital archive of the author
Willa Cather's novels, stories, nonfiction, letters, and journalism,
offers both high-quality scanned images and encoded text. The TEI for
Cather's correspondance describes in detail personal and geographical
references within the text. Below is an image of an excerpt of
Cather's letter, with the encoded references in orange.[fn:13]

[[./cather_tei.png]]

Similarly to the ~<handShift>~ tag in the Shelley-Godwin Archive, this
project makes uses of Each person or place is encoded with a
~<persName>~ or ~<placeName>~ element, which contains a unique
identifier (the ~@target~ attribute) for each entity that points to
the description of each entity in the textual apparatus.

#+BEGIN_SOURCE xml
<persName target="psn:0105">Grandma</persName>
is much better now though we do not think she will ever walk again.
<persName target="psn:1277">Her son</persName>
from
<placeName target="geo:0223">Va.</placeName>
spent six weeks with us. He,
<persName target="psn:0180">papa</persName>
&
<persName target="psn:0198">Mama</persName>
went to
<placeName target="geo:0062">Denver Col.</placeName>
and had a very pleasant time.
#+END_SOURCE

*** extensibility & nesting 

TEI is an extension of XML, or eXtensible Markup Language,
specifically made to render humanities textual data. XML is not
actually a language, but a framework or model for creating more
specific markup languages. XML documents resemble an ordered hierarchy
or nested tree structure, with the one "root" component and several
"branches" that divide into smaller components, or what David
J. Birnbaum describes as "nodes." Birnbaum explains the organization
of an XML document with the example of a book:

#+BEGIN_SOURCE
[T]he root node is the book, it might contain a title-page node,
followed by a table-of-contents node (which contains nodes for each
content item listed, in order, and each of those, in turn, might
contain two nodes, one for the table-of-contents entry and the other
for the page reference). The table-of-contents node might be followed
by chapter nodes, in order, and each chapter node might contain a
chapter-title node followed by paragraph nodes, once again in a
particular order. Nodes may also contain text, and not just other
nodes.
#+END_SOURCE

This book, with it's root, title page, table of contents, chapters,
and paragraph elements might be formalized into XML as the following:

#+BEGIN_SOURCE xml
<book>
    <titlePage>
    <tableofContents>
    <chapter1>
        <paragraph>
        <paragraph>
        ...
    <chapter2>
    ...
#+END_SOURCE

As an extension of XML, TEI carries with it many aspects and qualities
that are inherent to XML, particularly customization, nesting and
containment. 

First, "eXtensible" in XML means that one may extend, or customize,
the XML. In other words, XML allows one to create custom tags that
suit particular projects. Though the strict tagging schema of TEI may
inadvertantly encourage encoders to resolve a text’s ambiguity, it
does a good job addressing the more fixed and disambiguated textual
elements in a way that reflects widespread consensus about these. /The
Women Writers Project/, directed by Julia Flanders, adequately frames
how TEI's inherent extensibility can handle textual
ambiguity. According to the /WWP/:
#+BEGIN_SOURCE 
Unlike many standardization efforts, the TEI ... explicitly
accommodat[es] variation and debate within its technical
framework. The TEI Guidelines are designed to be both modular and
customizable, so that specific projects can choose the relevant
portions of the TEI and ignore the rest, and can also if necessary
create extensions of the TEI language to describe facets of the text
which the TEI does not yet address.
#+END_SOURCE
In other words, TEI is built from a language that allows its users, in
turn, to build their own version of that language. As a result, there
is potential for representing the elements necessary to a project by
customizing these elements on a project-by-project basis.

In addition to extensibility, the documents must be "nested" or
well-formed according within the XML structure. Each element contains
an opening tag and a closing tag. These tags must be contained within
other tags, with no overlapping of tags. In the below example, the
~<emphasis>~ tags are contained within the ~<sentence>~ tags.

#+BEGIN_SOURCE xml
<sentence>This is <emphasis>bad</sentence>form.</emphasis> 
<sentence>This is <emphasis>good</emphasis>form.</sentence>
#+END_SOURCE

*** TEI containment

When working with TEI, there is a trade-off between standardization
and dynamicity, which applies in particular to encoding queer
elements. In order to be standardizable and useful across a variety of
context, TEI imposes a certain fixity on textual data. The TEI
Consortium collectively develops and maintains the TEI around the idea
of consensus. The goal of the Consortium is to create a standard for
machine-readable text in the humanities, social sciences, and
linguistics. Because the format of the TEI itself is built from a
non-invasive markup language (XML), it can be preserved over time and
across computer programs, and will outlast more stylized file formats
like a Microsoft Word document.

However, the enforcement of standards for encoding text has its
drawbacks. As humanists well know, textual data is open to
interpretation, and there are always elements that cannot be contained
within rigid categories or delimitations. The TEI--both in its format
and the content of the tags--struggles to register ambiguity in
textual data. English Studies and TEI Scholar Julia Flanders explains
that markup imposes fixity on textual elements. She gives an example
with the ~<person>~ element, which describes persons referenced within
a text. Flanders explains that this ~<person>~ element is limited in
the kind of information it can hold, such as one gender identity for
each individual.

For scholars working to encode multiple or diverse sexual identities,
this data structure creates obstacles. For example, Pamela Caughie and
Sabine Meyer endeavor to encode gender identity in the /Man Into
Woman/, the life narrative of Lili Elbe, also known as the Danish
artist Einer Wagner, who undertook one of the first gender affirming
surgeries in 1930. The TEI, which only allows one value for the
attribute "sex," cannot adequately refelct the complex sexual
oscillations of Elbe's life narrative. Working with Elbe's complex
gender ontology brought Caughie and Meyer against the limitations of
the TEI:
#+BEGIN_QUOTE
[T]he deeper we got into mark-up, the more evident it became that the
categories and hierarchies available to us were inadequate for our
task... to identify a male subject who at times presents himself as
masquerading as a woman, at others as being inhabited by one, and who
eventually becomes a woman, in a life history narrated retrospectively
from the perspective of Lili Elbe... 231
#+END_QUOTE
For Caughie and Meyer, the limitations of the TEI are instructive by
forcing them to consider the ways that computation works on a deeper
level to reify gender as essential. The fixity that the TEI imposes
upon the textual subject contrasts the ways that gender is situational
and relational across this text.

On the one hand, the TEI is strict about what constitutes a person--as
a single entity with one sex, for example. But on the other hand, the
nature of the TEI enables an expansive approach toward
personhood. Marion Thain's work encoding the diaries of Michael Field
may appear to grapple with the same problem that Caughie and Meyer
encounter with Lili Elbe. Like Caughie and Meyer, Thain works with a
complex writing subject, a late 19th century English lesbian couple,
Katharine Bradley and Edith Cooper, who write collectively under the
shared pen name, Michael Field. The name "Michael Field," therefore,
contains a multiplicity; Thain explains that it is "a bipartite name,
signifying the assumed names of two separate women, as well as
appearing to signify one single male identity" (228). For Thain, the
TEI allows the encoding of multiple identities connected to the
personages of Edith Cooper and Katharine Bradley. She uses the
~<persName>~ tag to "render searchable words not in the text but
intimately tied to it. This is not a small issue in a diary in which
Katharine Bradley herself is referred to by more than 20 different
names" (233). Thain can solve the problem of multiple identities by
encoding each one to its proper person, either Cooper or Bradley,
within the TEI.

If both the Lili Elbe and Michael Field projects deal distinctly with
queer identities, why do Caughie and Meyer struggle to encode Elbe's
identity while Thain appears to succeed with Field? The answer is that
Michael Fields's identity is /multiple/ while Lili Elbe's is /plural/,
and TEI works best when the data, like Fields's, is discrete. As Julia
Flanders points out, markup is a tool for naming, bounding, and
containment. As such, it works best with information that can be
separated into distinct components in tagging. It does not work well
with smooth information, or ambiguous information, which can be
categorized as partial or shared ("Queer Encoding"). In TEI, tags must
be nested or side by side, they cannot overlap. Therefore, TEI works
well to encode multiple identities or identities contained within
certain entities, as long as these identities do not blend or
overlap. The queerness of Michael Field's identity is that it contains
multitudes of distinct identities connected to either Cooper or
Bradley. Thain explains that the diaries "do not pretend to record the
life of a single male, as two different hands record the experience of
two clearly differentiated people" (229). Elbe's narrative, by
contrast, not multiple as much as she is plural, containing several
identities whose relationship to each other is amibguous or
continually shifting within one identity. Elbe's relation to gender is
a smooth or qualitative one. How might one encode a single entity that
alternatively "masquerades" or "inhabits" simultaneous gender
identities? While a queerness like Fields might be be delineated and
contained, with each identity named, and linked, in Elbe's there is a
quality of blending in identity which the markup, by its nature, is
meant to separate and fix.

"the proliferation and slipperiness of names is no mere childish
caprice but a core part of the articulation of queer: an unhinging of
‘given’ or apparently predetermined identity through a strategy that
articulates identity as constantly shifting, constructed, and
performative. Text encoding can, in a simple but powerful way, help us
explore and map this crucial strand of queer identity construction
across the diary" (233).

*** should the TEI be used to deconstruct or create

For Flanders, TEI is already queerable, because it
encourages dissent though customization. Each project can create its
own tags that suit its particular needs. The ability for researchers
to create their own custom tags, for example, allow them to "imagine
descriptive systems for identity that would operate in specific
contexts (rather than totalizing contexts)... with appropriate places
for saying 'there is also something uncontestable here'" ("Queer
Encoding"). Opposing the view that TEI is flexible enough to engage
queerness, scholars like Caughie and Meyer maintain that it falls
short. In their work, TEI reinforces the fundamental elusiveness of
mapping gender ontologies:
#+BEGIN_QUOTE
On the one hand, gender ontologies, for all their hierarchical,
Anglocentric, and metaphysical baggage, are crucial if we are going to
map the formation and de-formation of gender across texts, times, and
cultures. Ontologies could be helpful in showing where similar terms
are being used in different ways, within a text and across texts, or
how one person’s gender/sexuality is being defined in different ways
within a text. On the other hand, there may not be a technological
solution to the difficulties posed by gender ontologies... Data will
always be contextual, limited, and only proximate to any individual
identity. 238
#+END_QUOTE
So while TEI encourages the creation of customized tags, there is
still something that eludes what Flanders describes as its
"queerability". The potential for customization does not enable one to
avoid the limitations of containment, in which all data must be
rigidly demarcated within semantic tags. Though the potential for new
semantic labels are limitless, they are still fixed by the structure
of the label. TEI bounds what it names in ways that preclude plural
ontologies.


** TODO My customization of the TEI

So what to do with this constraint of containment? I have tried to
describe the changes to the manuscript using a custom set of tags that
register both physical (renditional) and conceptual (thematic)
elements. My work is an attempt to formalize a method that marks the ways
that homoeroticism has been elided or transformed as Wilde prepared
the story for publication. 

To indicate sections of text that are struck out by Wilde's pen, I
created the new attribute, "strokes," and set its value to a
number. Often, Wilde alternates using one or two or more strokes of his
pen. Sometimes, the strokes are so numerous or thick as to be
uncountable. For these, I used the value "inconclusive."

[image of 1 stroke, 2 strokes, and inconclusive strokes]

In addition to strokes, I also created the new attribute,
"implication," and set its value to a number of recurring themes from
the deleted text. The values are, "tension," "intimacy," "affection,"
"beauty," "passion," and "fatality," with the additional values of
"inconclusive" or "illegible" to describe ambiguous elements. 

My work with these attribute values surfaces the textual connotations
within a spectrum of smooth information, in which the boundaries are
not clearly demarcated, in which I have to make final decisions. There
are moments where I have to decide between intimacy or affection, or
fatality and passion, for example. 

[example of intimacy vs affection (hand touch/brush)]

[example of fatality & passion (a look of pain)]

To fix these ambiguities, I could tag them with multiple values, even
all of the above. But this would dilute the analytical utility of the
TEI, which is meant to be decisive rather than exhaustive. On the
other hand, I could also be even more specific, employing qualitative
markers that are ever more precise, "tenderness" in addition to
"affection," or "ardor," or "devotion," in addition to "passion."
However, the more specific the tags, the more demarcated the
possibilities for analysis. The more the data is fixed into rigid
categories. 

The question, moving forward, is how do we label something as static
and keep it fluid at the same time?

*** Conclusion: deformative TEI, toward a queer form
How can we apply McGann's idea of deformance to Love's position?


* commands
c-c c-x f => create a new footnote
c-u c-c c-x f then select sort then renumber footnotes

block quotes: #+BEGIN_QUOTE & #+END_QUOTE

* Footnotes

[fn:1] Greg, Walter W. "The Rationale of Copy-Text," /Studies in
Bibliography/ Vol. 3, 1950/1951, pp. 19-36.

[fn:2] Tanselle, Thomas. /A Rationale of Textual Criticism/, 1992.

[fn:3] All references to DG90 and DG91 pertain to the Norton Critical
Edition of The Picture of Dorian Gray, edited by Michael Patrick
Gillespie.

[fn:4] Though this paper considers some of Stoddart’s editorial
influence on the typescript, see pp. 40-54 in Nicolas Frankel's /The
Picture of Dorian Gray: An Annotated, Uncensored Edition/ for a more
complete accounting of his role in preparing the typescript for
publication. Frankel's edition attempts to reinstate Wilde’s original
intentions in the typescript, "representing the novel as Wilde
envisioned it in the spring of 1890, before Stoddart began to work his
way through the typescript with his pencil and before Wilde’s later
self-censorship of the novel" (21).

[fn:5] See the Norton Critical Edition of /The Picture of Dorian
Gray/, ed. Michael Patrick Gillespie, for a selected list of
full-length reviews from /The Scots Observer/, /The St James Gazette/
and the /Daily Chronicle/, and Wilde’s responses.

[fn:6]  And later on, in /DG91/, Wilde deletes more evidence of
touching, this time by Lord Henry, “Laying a hand on [Basil’s]
shoulder” and again from Basil, “shaking his hand off” (Gillespie
187-188). These changes are only the beginning a series of more
discrete revisions that work to obscure the intimacy and understanding
between Basil and Lord Henry.

[fn:7] The revisions in these lines continue past the manuscript, into
/DG91/. In the book version, “and” is exchanged for “but”, “murmured”
for “continued”, and “looking” for “glancing”; so the line finally
reads, “‘I will tell you,’ said Hallward; but an expression of
perplexity came over his face. ‘I am all expectation, Basil,’
continued his companion, glancing at him” (Gillespie, 188). The change
in coordinating conjunction—“but” for “and”—opposes Basil’s words
against his “expression of perplexity”, suggesting that Basil is able
to maintain a degree of composure, at least in his speech, if not his
expression. The other, more obvious changes shift the emotional tenor
of Lord Henry’s speech and action. Rather than “murmur”, Lord Henry
“continue[s]”; and rather than “look”, he “glance[s]” at Basil. These
alterations, which might appear insignificant when isolated, together
work to further neutralize the tension and sense of mutual
understanding that originally permeates their exchange.

[fn:8] The revisions in these lines continue past the manuscript, into
/DG91/. In the book version, “and” is exchanged for “but”, “murmured”
for “continued”, and “looking” for “glancing”; so the line finally
reads, “‘I will tell you,’ said Hallward; but an expression of
perplexity came over his face. ‘I am all expectation, Basil,’
continued his companion, glancing at him” (Gillespie, 188). The change
in coordinating conjunction—“but” for “and”—opposes Basil’s words
against his “expression of perplexity”, suggesting that Basil is able
to maintain a degree of composure, at least in his speech, if not his
expression. The other, more obvious changes shift the emotional tenor
of Lord Henry’s speech and action. Rather than “murmur”, Lord Henry
“continue[s]”; and rather than “look”, he “glance[s]” at Basil. These
alterations, which might appear insignificant when isolated, together
work to further neutralize the tension and sense of mutual
understanding that originally permeates their exchange.

[fn:9] This dialogue is further revised for the book version to solidify
Dorian’s position as an aesthetic subject, removing any indication of
Basil’s romantic or emotional affection for him. Once Basil attributes
his anxiety to his painting, his jealousy for Lord Henry appears
excessive, and the latter’s dismissal comes across more naturally. The
scene thereby conveys a sense of comedy that is missing from its
original in the manuscript. The final version of the passage reads:

‘Don’t take away from me the one person that gives my art whatever
charm it possesses: my life as an artist depends on him. Mind. Harry,
I trust you.’ He spoke very slowly, and the words seemed wrung out of
him almost against his will.

‘What nonsense you talk,’ said Lord Henry, smiling, and, taking
Hallward by the arm, he almost led him to the house. (Gillespie 16)

In this version, Dorian’s significance in Basil’s life is relegated to
his influence upon Basil’s art. The book gets rid of the words, “makes
life absolutely lovely to me” as well as “wonder”, and includes the
following addition, “my life as an artist depends on him”. These
changes enhance the shift of focus, from romance to aesthetics, begun
in the manuscript. Accordingly, Lord Henry’s dismissal, rather than
suggest Basil’s emotional or romantic feeling for Dorian, responds
directly to Basil’s anxiety about his work. And the tone of his
response, maintaining its humorous note from the manuscript revisions,
here comes across more naturally. When the topic shifts from romantic
possession to Dorian’s position as an artistic subject, Basil’s
worries seem exaggerated, and do appear to be “nonsense”. The dialogue
thereby succeeds in eliminating a sense of sympathy and sensitive
understanding between the two characters, and turns a jealous tension
into an exchange that ends in a jaunty dismissal.

[fn:10] Another replacement, which occurs in the revisions between
/DG90/ and /DG91/, also diminishes Basil’s emotional
intensity. Describing his first meeting with Dorian, Basil admits, “It
was mad of me, but I asked Lady Brandon to introduce me to him”
(Gillespie 190). In DG91, Wilde switches the word “mad” for
“reckless”, so the line reads: “It was reckless of me, but I asked...”
(my italics; Gillespie 10). By using “reckless” instead of "mad,"
Basil acknowledges the irrational element as a deliberate choice,
taking a greater responsibility for his action. In this way, Dorian
Gray’s influence shifts from a dominating one that compels Basil
almost against his will, to one that tempts him but ultimately defers
to his volition.

[fn:11] Interestingly, while this line appears in the /Lippincott’s/
version of the story, it is completely omitted from DG91. The passage
here reads: “I had a strange feeling that Fate had in store for me
exquisite joys and exquisite sorrows. I grew afraid, and turned to
quit the room” (Gillespie 10).  Wilde may have removed the line due to
its awkward, slightly repetitive phrasing, or he may have meant to
completely eliminate the suggestion about Dorian’s influence over
Basil. Either way, it remains clear that the revision is driven, at
least in part, by a desire to reduce the fatal seriousness of Basil’s
devotion to Dorian.

[fn:12] This passage is further revised in /DG90/, where Wilde
rearranges lines and cuts them. In /DG90/, it reads:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE 
Now and then, however, he is horribly thoughtless, and seems to take a
real delight in giving me pain. Then I feel, Harry, that I have given
away my whole soul to some one who treats it as if it were a flower to
put in his coat, a bit of decoration to charm his vanity, an ornament
for a summer’s day. Gillespie 194
#+END_QUOTE

Wilde here deletes a series of lines from the manuscript that describe
Basil’s possessiveness and his sense of complicity in his
suffering. In /DG90/, the passage maintains a few hints about Basil’s
suffering—-"giving me pain"-—but he emphasizes Dorian’s response-—his
frivolous regard for Basil’s affection, “as if it were a flower to put
in his coat, a bit of decoration to charm his vanity, an ornament for
a summer’s day” (MS 23). The revision shifts the focus away from
Basil’s tortured and jealous attachment to Dorian, and toward Dorian’s
careless regard for his devotion. In this way, Wilde diminishes the
serious and destructive effects of Basil’s attachment and instead
emphasizes Dorian’s oblivious attitude toward him.

[fn:13] Willa Cather to Helen Louise Stevens Stowell, August
31, 1888. https://cather.unl.edu/writings/letters/let0001

[fn:14] Barnett, Fiona, Zach Blas, Micha Cárdenas, Jacob Gaboury,
Jessica Marie Johnson, and Margaret Rhee. "QueerOS: A User’s Manual"
/Debates in the Digital Humanities/ 2016.

[fn:15] Gaboury, Jacob. "Becoming NULL: Queer relations in the
excluded middle." Women & Performance: a journal of feminist theory
28.2 (2018): 143-158.

[fn:16] See Traub, Valerie. “The New Unhistoricism in Queer Studies.”
PMLA, vol. 128, no. 1, 2013, pp. 21–39; and Halperin, David M. "How to
Do the History of Male Homosexuality." GLQ: A Journal of Lesbian and
Gay Studies, vol. 6 no. 1, 2000, p. 87-123.

[fn:17] See Goldberg, Jonathan, and Madhavi Menon. “Queering History.”
PMLA, vol. 120, no. 5, 2005, pp. 1608–1617; and Freccero, Carla, et
al. “Historicism and Unhistoricism in Queer Studies.” PMLA, vol. 128,
no. 3, 2013, pp. 781–786.
