{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2513
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica-Bold;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww20640\viewh12080\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs48 \cf0 Intro \
- Lilith cannot resist sex drive, despite threat to human species. Even when the sex is in the mind, she cannot mentally control her body\'92s desire\
- what is the role of the body in determining behavior?\
	- biology enables evolution; reinforces tribalism; tension; \
	- reinforces heterosexuality \
	- but the relation between mind/brain, thinking/feeling makes it queer. \
		\'97> I explore the collision of registers cognitive/physical across domains\
\
Sex (set up problem of [materiality])\
\'97\'97\
- fear is embodied then intellectual, expressed in analogy \'93Medusa,\'94 \
	- physio-cognitive process of \'93medusa\'94 enacts the human contradiction\
	- according to chicanas, overcoming fear of the other involves embracing sensuality and 	relinquishing agency. The Coatlicue state.  \
- the sex act collapses of thinking/feeling to conflate desire vs will.\
	- the Oankali, who crave difference, reform agency/consent.\
	- physical and mental experiences become fused\
\'97> in sex, the collapse of body/mind emphasizes fleshy sensation\
	- where the outer body (flesh) is bypassed for direct neural connection, this connection still	leaves room for distance, making it queer. \
\
Flesh (strategies for handling the problem)\
\'97 \'97\
- how do different domains theorize relationship between materiality and meaning?\
- how can we emphasize communication/connection through the flesh?\
- black feminist studies:\
	- foreclosure makes multiple registers of reading by denial (shifting)\
	- fugitivity amplifies meaning by reduction (reduction from analog to digital?)\
	- unmappability prevents the localization of meaning by ambiguity (volatility up the stack)\
- media archaeology studies:\
	- displacement appears to digital media appear immaterial, but signals flicker, grounded in physical transformations, as they move up the stack. \
	- these physical transformations feed into a formal dimension of materiality. A production of form that creates a sense of movement:\
		- is \'93volatile\'94 \'97 as data abstracts from inscription it also becomes more manipulable, changeable. \
		- expresses \'93torque\'94 \'97 a movement, shifting between registers. \
\
Skin (this applies the strategies to a close reading)\
\'97\'97\
- air.html: readings across kinds of formal materiality deepens screen effects (
\f1\b torque
\f0\b0 )\
	- the screen effect is magnetized movement. \
	- code to screen: binary structure surfaces a tension between control and multiplicity. \
		- The movement enables some freedom within constraints. \
	- what does reading the formal materiality of code structure and display enable? \
		- the piece is about freedom that cannot be fully grasped.\
		- the figures can move wildly, but they are intractable. \
\
- control.html: (
\f1\b unmappability
\f0\b0 ) of image/text \
	- screen level:\
		- the surface effect is lag and fragmentation: images jumpy and text partial\
	- code reveals superimposition of images and text, activated by mouse location \
		- image cannot be located to one precise point; it exists across many images together\
		- hidden message, read up and down the \'93alt-text\'94 column. \
	- the piece is about control, or lack of control. \
		\'97>  
\f1\b unmappability
\f0\b0  of message across layers of the surface. Not able to locate.\
		- Can move her face but it jumps, it\'92s not smooth. \
		- in code, we get all of the message. It\'92s mappable. \
		- on surface: only part of the message exists at any point: unmappable. \
\
- breath.html\
	- sensuality of sound. From breathing, to smoking, to whispers.\
	- plays on the visibility/invisibility of air-based media\
\
Whispering windows: \
	- layers of displacement endows expressive possibility on the surface\
	- all physical attributes\'97including race\'97become an attribute. \
	- severed from the body, transposed to the screen, becomes flattened into a list\
	- but the hope is there, in the stutter of letters, and hope is a way of maintaining distance\
\
Formal levels of materiality enhance the sensual effects across layers. Everything becomes skin. \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
}