Title:  Why Is This Useful?
Date: 2019-11-22
Category: failures

Last week I had a dissertation workshop where I presented a rough
draft of my chapter on Social Annotation. I was feeling pretty
vulnerable about it. Not only is the draft in its infancy, but it also
combines a few disciplines that aren't typical for projects in English
studies.

To give some background---I'm developing a digital annotation tool
that has a multi-color highlighter for teaching purposes. I'm hoping
that the colors will help students to engage their immediate and
embodied responses to reading, which happen prior to their
articulation in language. Basically, I'm hoping that using colors will
allow readers to mark their reactions to reading by assigning certain
reactions to specific colors. The point, for me, is to explore
alternative kinds of annotation, particularly annotation that short
circuits verbalized forms of response. My paper on this project (which
will be fully drafted once I use the tool in the classroom)
interweaves my narrative of the tool's technical development with
discourses on educational technology and neuroscience. I'm trying to
show the ways that current annotation tools track or quantify student
data, and how looking at reading from a neuroscientific lense,
particularly from the perspective of embodied cognition, opens up the
way we understand students' engagement with text. To better display
this engagement, I created the highlighter with really low color
opacities that facilitates layering. I imagine that different readers
will highlight with different colors over the same piece of text. My
idea is that the color-highlighter's layering capability will create a
kind of "heatmap" of the text, which manifests in new color
combinations. This palimpsest of readings will (I hope) show student
reactions in contrast.

Most of the feedback I got from the group was really useful. There
were comments about the structure, foregrounding the experimental
nature of the project, and rethinking how I interweave my development
notes (which everyone agreed should be included). There were also
specific terms and concepts I need to clarify, like embodiment (what
do I mean by "prediscursive" and what kind of affect theory is this)
and color frameworks. 

The most challenging comment was about stakes. One of the workshop
participants went on at length about needing to explain why this tool
is useful. Here were some of the questions:

- What do I want out of this tool?

- What am I doing that's different from using actual highlighters in
books?

- Why should instructors care which neurons are firing?

- Why is the student’s affective experience important?

- Who is my audience? Which conversations do I want to insert myself
  into? 
  
I tried to answer some of these questions in the moment. Mainly my
answer for the "why" is that if we [English scholars] don’t guide this
conversation it will be guided for us, by the tech companies. If we
[the educators] don't think about how our tools work we will use them
uncritically, and our students will become a source of data collection
rather than aesthetic production. I have some language to this effect
in the introduction, but I guess it's understated. I also tend to
assume that everybody thinks like me and already knows that edtech is
evil. 

But then, afterward, I got to thinking about it. And how absurd it is
that I was asked to defend the utility of my work. Nobody else in the
workshop is being asked these questions---at least not that I have
noticed. Only my project, the sole technical project, has this
burden. Why should I have to explain myself, when my colleagues, who
are mostly doing non traditional work on archives, melancholia, music,
composition studies, ventriloquisim, aren't being asked to do the
same?

Even though the majority of my classmates' projects aren't
"traditional," there's an implicit agreement that the exploratory
nature of their scholarship is inherently important. Their choices
about objects of study or methods aren't questioned. Why should I have
to explain my decisions? Why can't I just tell you what I'm thinking?



