---
layout: post
title: Queerness as Data
categories: [dissertation, data, identification, Love, Drucker]
--- 

So I've been taking the first stabs at the dissertation, trying to get
down a draft of the foundational chapter, which is about methods. The
goal is to weave together reading methods from specific strands of
Queer Theory and the Digital Humanities, trying to fixate on what they
share, which is a sensitivity to the critic's distance from the
textual subject, a relationality. I'm trying to map out this
parallelism about the way that these theorists treat the objects of
their study---as incapable of being fully figured---and the moment of
convergence, which is the act of identification, I think.

On the Queer Theory side, I've started with Heather Love's *Feeling
Backward*, drawing out Love's descriptions of queer subjects as
unredeemable and lost in their own sufffering. She is largely
responding to critical narratives that try to resolve or recuperate
the psychic trauma undergone by queer subjects, transforming them into
pride, liberation, or at least the acknowledgment of repression. She
argues against an "affirmative" reading of these subjects, insisting
instead that critics allow them their ambiguity and use that as a
foundation for theorizing. For example, she reads in Walter Pater a
hesitance, a preference to linger in a space of withdrawal, before the
emergence of modern homosexual identity, in "a world in which time was
suspended" (58). Her reading materializes the "dual movement of
solicitation and self-effacement" (59) in his writing, and theorizes
what she calls "the epistemology of the vestibule" (64) into a
politics of suspension and inaction. For Love, the experience of
queerness cannot be captured, it is something raw and elusive.

From Love's "feeling backward," I turn to an example from DH about
analytical methods that cannot fully capture the complexity of
data. Johanna Drucker's "Humanities Approaches to Graphical Display"
explains how all data, rather than "given," is actually "taken" or
constructed, what she calls *capta*. Drucker goes into detail about
how quantification necessarily reduces and eliminates many aspects
about itself, obscuring its own interpretive choices. She gives the
example of a graph which shows number of books published by year, and
points out that such a graph hides the reason for choosing
"publication date" as a measure of productivity, rather than, for
instance, composition, editing, review, distribution, etc. For
Drucker, all visualizations, in simplifying and regularizing their
data, collapse certain aspects about their subjects in ways that mask
their actual constructedness. To counter this misrepresentation,
Drucker deliberately messes with graphical metrics, breaking lines and
blurring bars, showing how the entities of data are actually fuzzy,
malleable, and above all, unknowable. 

Between Drucker and Love, I try to bring out the way they similarly
approach the objects of their study as somehow beyond the critic's
grasp. Drucker makes evident what is overlooked or assumed when
dealing with complex subjects. She places those elements there, for
all to see, in a way that muddles the relationship between them. Like
Love, Drucker works on the “image of exile, of refusal, even of
failure” (Love 71).

The next step for me is to hone this idea of identification. In my
section on Love, I spend some time proposing identification as a
reading method. By "identification," I mean the act in which the
critic finds something in the textual subject that touches or
*coincides* with the critic. In what ways does this act of
"identification" also relate to the ways we respond to graphical or
quantified information? Can we "identify" with a graphic? I'm not sure
this is the route to go. I think I need to reframe identification as a
means of feeling, of being pulled forward. What pulls the reader
through a queer narrative, similarly to what pulls the user through a
graphical interface. It is a motive force.

Some other things that came up:
- Throughout my discussion of Drucker, I'm trying to respond to
Moretti (presenting him in direct opposition to many of her ideas)
without naming him explicitly in the body of my writing. Instead, I'm
relegating him to the footnotes, an appendage.
- I've also been reading Yiyun Li's *Dear Friend, from my Life I Write
to you in your Life*, which is clarifying the way that I think about
the confines of identification. Li very clearly presents a paradigm
for reading *not* to identify (she doesn't see herself in ficitonal
characters) but to acquire a certain invisibility among others. Need
to think more about this need to be with but not of the subjects that
we read. 
