---
layout: post
title: Drafting the Intro
categories: [dissertation, rosenberg, fisher, munoz]
--- 

My past two posts have been clarifying the concept of "untouchable"
and how it functions in relation to queerness. "Untouchable" denotes a
state of *suspended knowledge* (about queer subjectivity and
experience) that allows me to then turn to *feeling and affect* as
epistemological methods.
    - First, I worked out a definition of "untouchable" as the raw
      data about queer subjectivity and experience that cannot be
      quantified. (later in the chapter, I will explain that in order
      to engage (or “interface”) with this data, we need abstraction
      and formalization.
	- Then, I looked for analogies of the "untouchable" in other
      fields (history and science) that display the impulse to verify,
      correct, or recover. In literary studies, this impulse for
      satisfaction is observed in “paranoid” or “suspicious” reading
      practices, which attempt to find "hidden meaning" in texts in a
      way that constrains inquiry.

These past two weeks, I've been working on the introduction, because
it occurs to me that I need a solid definition of queerness before
moving on to describe how queerness is untouchable. So I defined the
core condition of queerness being **"the desire for touching," a
desire that is ultimately frustrated, deferred, or eluded** (analogous
to Jose Munoz's concept of queer horizon, the state of being "not yet
here"). Being queer is, at its core, a desire for connection---with
oneself or with others---that is continually thwarted by the
oppression, categories, and heteronormativity of dominant culture.

The "desire for touching," without being able to fully touch, as the
definition of queerness, is also where the digital and queer
intersect. Digital media creates the illusion that we have access to
data, to information, but all we have access to is a *formalized*
relationship to that data. We encounter the digital object through
mediation, through an interface, mice, GUIs, keyboards, etc. It is the
same with queernes, which we can only engage within formalized or
opaque structures---the formal experiments of queer writers. 

I'm trying to begin the chapter with this meditation on the
intersection of the digital and queerness. Right now, I'm doing so by
providing a few close readings, right at the start, which define
queerness as a thwarted desire for touching. In the example I've
chosen, by Jordy Rosenberg's *Confessions of the Fox*, I use an
evocative quote that characterizes sexual desire not on touch, but how
precluding touch activates other sensations that are more physical,
more intense, than touch. Then I jump to a hypertext novella, *These
Waves of Girls* by Caitlin Fisher, and discuss how the narrative pull
of clicking through the text enacts a desire for closure or
understanding that is never fully satisfied. 

It occurs to me now that I need to go a little more into the *Waves*
example, include a bit of media archaeology, the formal and forensic
(Matt Kirschenbaum) levels of materiality, and a bit about how
hypertext works, to fully round out this point. I'm drawing a parallel
between what Rosenberg is doing with refusing touch and what Fisher is
doing by frustrating touch. They are both searching for alternative
modes of connections, modes that active a fuller sensorium. 

So the introduction might be structured thus:
 - an opening statement on how touch relates to queerness and the
   digital
 - a definition of queerness as deferred desire for touching
 - introducing two case studies that demonstrate how queerness engages
   this idea of deffered touch in text and digital media.
   
 After this introduction, which is only meant to pique interest and
 set ideas into motion, I will move on to exploring the "untouchable"
 state of queerness in depth. 
   
 
