Title: Untouchable Queerness
Date: 2020-05-22
Category: text encoding

In my last post, I started to organize my thoughts on feminist distant
reading. My focus was to work out how we might open up the way we
interface with queerness as "untouchable," as the raw data that cannot
be quantified. The solution is to abstract and formalize so we can
move or "interface" with it.

The past few weeks I have dived into the issue of the
"untouchable"---what does it mean for the way we do critique?
Primarily, I've been looking for ways that other fields have eschewed
the impulse to verify, correct, or recover. In what follows, I outline
the main argument from the first third of my chapter, where I lay out
the state of queerness as "untouchable" by finding analogies in the
fields of science and history. 

First, queerness is defined as a desire for touch (the digital), a
desire that cannot be satisfied, redeemed, or recovered. This impulse
for satisfaction is observed in "paranoid" or "suspicious" reading
practices, which seek to answer or discover the "hidden" meaning in
text. These practices attempt to answer questions, but do so in a way
that constrains inquiry. This is because paranoia only delivers the
results that are *imaginable* within current knowledge structures.

We see the harm of paranoia, for example, in methods of science and
history. We encounter excellent critiques of these methods particularly
in recovery projects, such as slave history or the black
atlantic. Here, the goal of recovery creates a system of inquiry that
predetermines the results.

This is related to queerness, which is untouchable. It is a feeling of
embodied disembodiment, estrangement, loss. The state of queerness is
incommensurable. 

The burden of my writing in this section is to draw the ties between
racial critique and queer, in a way that doesn't diminish or
wrongfully appropriate the POC scholarship. I'm not trying to suggest
an equivalence, but pointing out that this kind of work has already
been done in other contexts. 

This section sets up the last part of the chapter, where I'll discuss
the preferred method of speculation, drawing from speculative history
methods by Saidiya Hartman, Lisa Lowe, and David Kazanjian, among
others such as Gloria Anzaldua and Cherrie Moraga. The harm of
paranoia comes from the subject/object divide, where the dominant
subject takes control/power over the other. Looking to work done in
slave history recovery, in chicanx studies and literature, we find
alternative ways of reading that involve speculation and play. They
require formalizing and abstracting what cannot be touched into a
touchable format. It involves playing with vantages (Lauren Klein),
provisionality (Julia Flanders, Susan Brown), and performance
(Katherine Bode, Tanya Clement). 


