Title: Envisioning Chapter Three
Date: 2022-02-03
Category: media archaeology

These are some speculations for my third chapter, which I'm going to
begin researching this spring. Whereas the first two chapters were
about text analysis and text encoding, this chapter will be about
*media*. I'm looking to explore how an attention to the material
specificity of media enhances our reading of eletronic literary work,
such as hypertext and interactive fiction.

The theoretical focus on this paper will engage New Materialisms and
Black Feminist studies. Here, I'll be drawing from my class last
semester with Amber Musser, where we read so many fascinating accounts
about materiality being lively, animated, vital, and about humanity
being imbricated with it. I'm thinking of authors like Jayna Brown and
Zakiyyah Iman Jackson, who work with (or work around) traditionally
white male dominated discourses about materiality and liberal humanism
to offer black female lineages of this kind of thinking. I'm also
interested in Musser's work, whose discussion of sensuality and
fleshiness will be key for my reading of media.

The technological focus of this paper will be on early computer
equipment. The reason that I'm interested in older versus newer
computers is I'm interested in what Katherine N. Hayles calls
"distributed cognitive environments," that is, the perceptual
engagement between user and computer. I think it will be easier to
study this from a historical remove, and I am also interested in the
continuous updating of technologies which forces data to shift from
one structure to another.

Here, I am heavily indebted to Matt Kirschenbaum's work in his book
*Mechanisms* (2008), his "media archeological" method of examining the
material specificities of what is commmonly thought of "immaterial"
computing processes. I'm thinking particularly of his chapter on hard
drives. My plan is to visit a few archives (ideally the Maryland
Institute of Technology, where Kirschenbaum is based, the Media
Archeology Lab in Boulder, and the Computer History Museum in
California) to look at old hardware and software.

Last step is to find a literary text for all of this. I've been
writing about hypertext fiction (and obsolesence of Flash software)
which is one option. Probably will stick with this. 
