Title: Looking Back
Date: 2023-10-09
Category: queerness

Reading over all of the posts on this blog, I'm struck by how my
thoughts have evolved around defining queerness and deploying it for
my project.

Early on, I remember being guided by this idea of queerness as
something that is not fully intelligible, not able to be fully
grasped. Yet, I argued, some of this quality could be apprehended
through formal manipulations, through abstractions, which the digital
provides in digtized formats and structures.

In my research, I was drawn to critics who used the digital to create
new forms. In literary studies, many of these critics descend from
Jerome Mcgann's line of thinking, with a focus on materiality (of the
appratus, as in Katherine Bode, or in performance as in Tanya Clement)
and how that materiality affords opportunities for social critique by
engaging what is not readily visible in data, such as assumptions
about how the data was constructed or traces of what is left out
(Johanna Drucker, Lauren Mandell, Lauren Klein). I found something
really refreshing in the way that they turned to digital methods as to
explore the mechanism of analysis and critique, its constraints, and
the possiblities contained within these constraints. The most exciting
thing, I argued, is how digital methods offers way formalizing textual
data for analysis.

To do this work, I needed to find something in the tool that collapsed
or reduced the complexity of queerness that was expressed in textual
form. So pronouns and minor hints of gender in language, or layered
revisions in manuscripts, or the relationship between sensation and
cognition as it unfolds in narrative. That collapsing element, the
constraint, as I call it, is a mechanism that evacuates subtlety or
ambiguity in these language forms. 

And then, I would re-imagine or in some cases even re-work the tool to
get some of those details back. Or at the very least, to surface what
has been lost. 

The main intervention, the thing that makes it queer is about
re-thinking our relationship to constraint. About working within
constraints. Sometimes this works (as in chapters 1 & 3) and sometimes
it does not (as in chapter 2). 

So where am I, now that I have done this work? Technology and
queerness and language as a constraint, but that can be revelatory,
that can release meaning, as long as you find a way of working with
it. 



