Title: Loops
Date: 2024-04-12
Category: revision

A couple of weeks ago, I had a Python workshop where I piloted a
streamlined version of my "Python for Working with Text" series,
playing around with the idea of a tutorial that jumps more directly
into loops from a very basic introduction to programming. The workshop
brought me to rethink the ways I could play around with the order of
how I teach Python concepts for working with text, particularly for
analyzing gender.

My goal, explained in the last post, is to re-write the dissertation
as a kind of programming handbook. So the past few days I've been
thinking up potential outlines for my first chapter of the diss, which
is on text analysis. The first chapter would be called "loops", and
takes the iterativity of the loop as method for exploring how gender
norms might be subverted in text analysis. Like the diss chapter, it begins
with a quote form *Orlando*, but it then moves directly into
instruction with loops. It explains how they work to clean the text of
*Orlando* and how to analyze some of its elements. Then it moves to
Gender Performativity, or it interweaves Performativity into the
technical instruction. Finally, at the end, it introduces word vectors
in a text analysis exercise. 

The idea might be that a student could do an entire chapter for
homework, say a week's homework, in a graduate course on Digital
Humanities or something like that. Now I'm getting really excited,
thinking about how the tutorial might open up computational ways of
reading through and thinking about "literary" textual data. 

As I draft out my ideas I'll have to figure out how to structure
everything, especially some of the denser theoretical segues like my
section on "falsifiable criticism". Maybe these can be streamlined
into notes in the margin, though I would also want to provide a deeper
engagement, should the reader want it. Maybe longer notes in the back,
maybe an appendix, I don't know.

This is super exciting. 




