---
layout: post
title: The Fantasy of the Falsifiable
categories: [dissertation workshop, feedback, revision]
--- 

In the past three months, this chapter has taken on a whole new
form. I had a meeting with my dissertation workshop in late October
that revealed to me how I was writing around the argument I wanted to
make, which is about deconstructing (in NKM's words) "the fantasy of
the falsifiable." So I cut about half of what I had already written,
the sections on the digital, queerness, and touch, and moved that to
an introductory chapter. What remained was the section where I
critique "reproducible" criticism, and that was pretty much it. Around
this section, I've written another on textual scholarship and
deformance, and one on queer performance. I'm now working on the final
section of the chapter, where I synthesize aspects from deformance and
preformance to present a new approach for "queer" text analysis. After
that, I will write up a quick intro that begins be presenting a
critique of the falsifiable, which I position as forerunner to the
reproducible. 

The burden of the chapter is to describe how to do text analysis in a
way that attends to queer concepts of performativity, and how that
method enhances the critical process. It begins by debunking the
fantasy of falsifiable criticism, presenting a critique of moretti's
methodology and stylistic approach (eventually with accompanying text
analysis). It then goes into a critique of current distant reading
practices, discussing Ted Underwood, Nan Z. Da, to emphasize how these
practices can often reproduce the critic's assumptions. This section
also discusses the work of Johanna Drucker and Richard Jean So,
emphasizing that their methods do a good job deconstructing social
categories. While this deconstruction is important, I'm interested in
analysis of text that disrupts what we know about these literary
materials by producing new structures, or formalizations of these
texts. Then, I go into a history of textual scholarship, focusing
particularly on the work of Jerome McGann, Tanya Clement, and
Katherine Bode, who offer a deformative and speculative understanding
of critical analysis that is useful for my proposal. Then, I dip into
Queer Theory, in particular Judith Butler's concepts of performativity
and citation, which lend an understanding to the ways that critical
processes can subvert dominant structures through iteration, or
"performative citation." This notion of displacement through
repetition is applied back to text analysis to illustrate how the
iterative process of analyzing text can surface new textual structures
that re-signify certain elements of that text. The chapter ends with
my reading of Virginia Woolf's /Orlando/, to show how our
understanding of "man" and "woman" in that text is re-signified
through this kind of text analysis. 

Next steps, is to continue to explore /Orlando/ and Moretti in Python
(though not for too long) so I can write up this final section and the
introduction. 

Almost there!
