---
layout: post
title: Drafting Chapter Two
categories: [TEI, text encoding, Oscar Wilde, Dorian Gray, Manuscript]
--- 

The goal for the summer was to address the remaining small edits of
the first chapter and to complete a readable draft of the second
chapter by August 31. I managed to make that goal, though a few days
late. 

I was able to repurpose most of my seminar paper on *Dorian Gray*,
about 15 pages or so, into this chapter. They formed the background
discussion of the manuscript and the analysis of the revisions in the
first chapter. Then came a period of heavy writing, about two weeks,
where I created new sections on "Queer Historiography," "TEI," an
introduction and conclusion.

The paper explores how to use TEI to mark up the homoerotic elements
that Wilde revised and obscured in the first chapter of the *Dorian
Gray* manuscript. I first examine the question of perservation in the
field of Textual Editing, drawing out a debate between the more
"conservative" (favoring preservation via the discovery of authorial
intention) and the more "productive" approach which fully develops
with the advent of digital media (and uses digital media to explore
productive permutations and presentations of textual material). Then I
bring another scholarly debate for comparison, which is the debate on
the proper methodology for Queer Historiography, that is, whether it
is possible or desirable for critics in the present to adequately know
queerness in the past. I isolate one perspective, that of Heather Love
and what she calls "feeling backward," which attends to the past
without trying to redeem or rescue it, as a guide toward developing my
editing methodology. I then turn to the manuscript itself, to examine
and analyze the changes that Wilde imposes on the homoerotic elements
from the first chapter. My reading here highlights a number of
"themes" that reveal what Wilde's pen worked to suppress, and include:
"tension," "affection," "passion," "beauty," and "fatality."  Finally,
I turn to the TEI (Text Encoding Initiative) language itself, pointing
out its characteristics relevant to my project, such as one seeming
contradiction between the potential for customization (TEI allows for
researchers to create custom tags according to the needs of the
project) and the constrained nature of the tags which nonetheless
impose a level of legibility and fixity on the text. I conclude by
demonstrating how my method marks up homoerotic elements, although not
in a way that fixes them or makes them more legible to
researchers. Rather, the markup serves to index moments where the
tagging and labelling fails to capture how the homoerotic themes
appear and function in the text. Here, the lesson from Queer
Historiography comes to the fore: the act of marking up a text, which
can never fully capture the queer elements of the text, really
functions more as a tool for discovering those moments that elude
containment.

Having submitted this draft for review, I don't think there's much to
do with it now but wait for revisions. In the meantime, I will go back
to the first chapter (for the third time!) to get it ready for Matt's
eyes. Hopefully a couple of weeks will help get it into "readable" form.

