---
layout: post
title: Sex and Flesh
categories: [Black Feminisms, media archeology, Octavia Butler, hypertext]
---

Since the spring my ideas for this chapter have solidified, and I am
beginning to see what the argument may look like. In the past few days
the fragments are coming together as a whole, to my surprise, as I've
become increasingly desperate, beating my head against a wall to make
two things talk to each other which don't speak the same language --
media archaeology and black feminist studies. In looking for some way
to talk about race and technology from a material standpoint, I landed
on the concept of the flesh, and have been struggling to theorize from
black feminist notions of flesh (beginning with Spillers through
Snorton and Musser) to get at this kind of radical potential contained
within the flesh, which operates through opacity and surface. In my
reading of Black Femininist thinking on the flesh, particularly
Snorton, what I found was a capacious way of thinking about the
intersection of two registers, of the material (flesh) and
cultural/symbolic (race/gender), which I can apply back to my thinking
about technology, and the intersecting registers of the digital and
analog.

But more on this later. For now, I want to highlight two things:
first, how relieved I am and ridiculous I feel to realize that one of
the texts that I analyze in this chapter, *Dawn* by Octavia Butler,
*is in fact* queer, because of the alien sex which uses a nonbinary
intermediary (duh!). I wanted to write about the alien sex (which is
why I chose this text) but had always approached it as a straight kind
of sex in my head, because of the male and female "terminals", so to
speak. However, now I do feel compelled to address the whole question
of what "counts" as queer, and whether it should be independent of
sex/gender, especially considering race and the conversations occuring
in black feminist studies around this question, which I think is
really the future of queer studies. Something else to think about.

The second thing will require more time and space to think about. How
do I talk about the flesh, mobilize ideas of the flesh, without
feeling like I'm instrumentalizing it? I'm trying to think with the
flesh, in looking at what it opens up, but cannot help feeling that my
work continues some kind of exploitation, which I don't want to be a
part of. I think the solution is to continually consider my
positionality as I do the project, and to be explicit about it in my
writing and teaching.

Below is a summary of the chapter as I am envisioning it now: 

>This chapter looks at the materiality of digital media by harnessing
concepts of the flesh as developed in black feminsist studies. First I
consider how the flesh has been theorized in black feminist studies,
particularly C. Riley Snorton's theorization of the "transcapable,"
which offers an analytic for understanding the kind of capacious
thinking required when two registers combine---the physical/analog and
the immaterial/digital. Throughout this converstation, I incorporate a
discussion of Octavia Butler's novel, *Dawn* (1987), as a way of
reading the intersection between the digital and analog, particularly
in the way that sexual relations occur through direct neural
stimulation between alien/human "triples," facilitated through the
third partner, non-binary intermediary being with the ability to
connect directly to the brain's pleasure centers. Then, I examine a
hypertext fiction work, a digital series by Entropy8Zuper! entitled
/skinonskinonskin/ (1999), and efforts at its preservation amid the
obsolescence of one of its major components, Flash technology. I trace
the complicated stack of hardware and software that facilitate the
display and preservation of this work, examining various technologies
that work in tandem such as internet networks, hypertext, and
Flash. These technologies together enable me to explore how
/skinonskinonskin/'s interface engages the intersection between the
digital and analog registers undergirding its components.
