---
layout: post
title: TEI and Queer Form
categories: [TEI, queer form, queer formalism, deformance, revising]
---

The work on chapter two has been taking longer than I thought-
there were three weeks of heavy revision in October/November, where I
made the following changes at the request of my peer reviewers. Then
a round of copyediting, which is done, and the final round of
proofreading, to be completed next week, after which the thing will
finally go to press. The major revisions included: 

- Clarifiying and foregrounding the central arguments w/r/t/ “queer
  encoding” and “queer form”
- Expanding sections on TEI, particularly discussion on my
  customization and the limitations of the tool
- Expanding engagement with Queer DH and Queer Historiography
  scholarship
- Cut down the overly descriptive sections on the history of the
  Manuscript
- Standardizing the writing style and in-text citations (to Harvard
  style)
- Including links to online images of the manuscript, rather than
  images I took with my phone, as the Morgan did not let me use my
  images for free.
  
As I was doing this work, I was also preparing fellowship and grant
applicaitons. I applied for the ACLA, Ford, and Graduate Center
Dissertation Fellowships. I also applied for two research grants (was
awarded one of them so far) and to a postdoctoral position at the New
School. This is to say, I've been spending a lot of time theorizing my
project across cover letters, proposals, abstracts, and research,
personal, and teaching statements.

One thing that I've been carefully theorizing is the importance of
*form* as a connection between the queer and digital---specifically
looking at how queerness takes certain forms in literary narrative and
voice, on the one hand, and how textual data takes certain forms when
it is digitized and/or computed. To explore queer form, I've been
marshalling Kadji Amin, Amber Musser, and Roy Perez's definition of
the term. They discuss queer form as a strategy for avoiding
compulsory visibility:

>For our purposes, queer form means challenging the primacy of the
>visual, which has too often been a site for pernicious power
>relations [...]. At their base, such operations of surveillance and
>classification rely on the concept of immutable difference, on sharp
>boundaries, and on the possibility of exhaustively knowing the other
>[...]. We see queer form as an aesthetics that moves persistently
>around the visual, thereby avoiding this flattening. To the extent
>that form operates behind the scenes as ideological impulse and
>materiality, queer formal practices can resist the dictates of
>transparency normally required of non-normative subjects by
>illuminating the unseen. In this way it not only troubles the
>epistemic assurances of the visual regime, but it also asks how
>shifting away from static visuality can circumnavigate questions of
>objectification. A move toward the diffusely sensual, and away from
>the linearity of visual gazing, articulates difference in terms that
>are not about dominance or norms, but that underscore the importance
>of thinking with other modes of knowing, theorizing, and
>experiencing. Queer form is about other ways of understanding
>relationships to power and relationships to being. 232-3

My work strives to show how Queer Form as an "aesthetics" can
productively mirror and offer openings to study digital forms. I've
been plumbing this connection between "queer formalism" and
"deformance" --- "queer formalism" is a term from Tyler Bradway's
*PMLA* article, "Queer Narrative Theory and the Relationality of
Form"; and "deformance" I take from Jerome McGann and Lisa Samuel's
foundational essay, "Deformance and Interpretation." Bradway describes
that, while Queer has been seen as a disrupter of form, such as
narrative form by disrupting chronology, linearity, or "reproductive
futurism," etc, Queerness is still accessible through form. He admits
that "Queerness tells no tales. It only disturbs, troubles, or
shatters them" (711). However, taking Amin, Musser, and Perez's ideas
about form as a strategy for opacity, he points out that "Queerness is
shaped by passionate attachments to certain forms," such as the "the
vivid interleavings of narrative and social theory in Gloria
Anzaldua's *Borderlands*, Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick's *Tendencies*, or
Jose Esteban Munoz's *Cruising Utopia*" (712). In my reading, McGann
and Samuels take a similar stance in their turn to digital forms, by
valuating any formal shift in text (such as from print to digital) for
the way it opens interpretive possiblities. 


